Jewish audio on Chabad.org.Alright Yidden, with the help of Hashem we are learning today's three prakim Rambam, Perek Chamisha Asar, and then the sixteenth and the seventeenth chapter. We're going to focus right now on the fifteenth chapter. And the fifteenth chapter has nine halachos and the goal of the fifteenth chapter is to properly break down the challenge and the solution to find the place of the moon.As we learned benogea the sun, we learned that the sun itself has the two galgalim, what we call the blue and the red. We spoke about the Gova HaShemesh and then we needed to explain how ultimately even after finding the correct sun, vis-a-vis the sun, what we call the emtzai, we needed furthermore the final step was to bring it down to the to the amiti, as we explained.

Right, we needed to translate the language of the sun to the common language. Now we're going to do the same thing with the moon, but we have to go through many steps to be able to come to the same place.Now, we learned in the fourteenth chapter that the moon has four galgalim. We're going to give them their names and Rabbi Losh gave them colors. That's something chiddush.

But we're going to get to the names and the colors in a moment. But before, just to quickly recap, that we have the three that are going to that that there's the three and the one. Why are we separating the three from the one? Because the three have the earth in their center. It's around the earth, as all the galgalim are.

If the earth is exactly in the center or not, we'll get to that soon. Like by the sun. We spoke about the blue and the red. Right? That the the red is not centered around the earth.

B'seder, but the earth is in middle somewhere. The fourth, we said, we're calling that the Galgal HaKatan. The Galgal HaKatan means not that it's small or big and how many miles. It's that it's b'chlal not going around the the the world.The Rambam also said in the previous chapter that the daily distance or mailos that the three galgalim are going around the earth, the Emtza HaYoreach It's not that the galgal katan doesn't go around the world.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay, okay, I'll step back. The Galgal HaKatan ends up going around the world because the Galgal HaKatan is in is is in the three galgalim. So since the three galgalim are going around the world, of course the galgal, but the movement, the center of the little galgal is not around the earth. Okay.

Now, veiter. We said generally that the the three galgalim are going 13.10 mailos a day. These are general statements that the Rambam spoke in the previous chapter. What do I mean by that? So if Rabbi Losh can pick up the camera over here.

So what we are looking for, here this center track, we saw this image yesterday, is the three. All of this is the three. And where this is what we are calling the Emtza HaYoreach, without visual you cannot see it. So when we spoke about the 13 10, we are not speaking about the actual moon, we're speaking about the Emtza HaYoreach point that's traveling every day from maarav to mizrach, you see the arrow is going 13 10.

That's all what we learned in the 14th chapter. Now aside of that, the moon is not on the Emtza HaYoreach. The moon is in is going around the little galgal. And if we're looking at the top half of the little galgal, right? The little galgal is, we're going to get to the numbers in a moment, but the little galgal is traveling 13 3 every day.

And it's going the 13 3, if you're looking at the top, at the top, it's going from mizrach l'maarav, actually going in the same direction of the Galgal HaYomi. Of course, it's going beyond the Galgal HaYomi. Just to go back to what we learned in the beginning of the 12th chapter, because the Galgal HaYomi is schlepping everything with it. But it's going in that same direction.

Okay, that is all beginning chapter 15.Now, based on that, a person can erroneously say, well, now the next step will be very easy. Let's do what we did with the sun. Right? If you have the 13 10, and then you have the other direction, the 13 3, you will know where the moon is. And then okay, fine, and then if there's an issue with the with the emtzai, with the amiti, we'll adjust that later.

No, you have to stop here and you have to really dive in a lot deeper. And let me explain to you what is really happening. And at least to address one issue, what we're trying to answer, that from our perspective, after the molad, the speed from us, what it appears to us of the moon is not consistent. It's not emes to say that the moon is moving 13 3 on the little galgal.

It's not so. So b'chlal, you want to find where the moon is. You can't say, well, the three go 13 10. The other one is going 13 3.

mechaye and make the cheshbon. No. Because it's not going 13 3. But it is going 13 3, but it's not going 13 3.

And what the fact is, is that after the molad, this is not the whole month, after the molad it's going quicker than that. Quicker mean it's going quicker mi'mizrach l'maarav because that little galgal is going mi'mizrach l'maarav. So how is that even possible? Hashem is Ein Sof. And and that expresses itself in consistency.

Right, every day the same thing is happening with the same koach with the same speed. So it is the same speed, but it's not the same speed. It is the it is and it's not. B'chlal, someone should make a book of psychology correlating these movements to who we are.

Because this is mamash how we are. And we're doimeh l'lavana, and that goes b'chlal on the Yidden and particularly by the women. And when you'll understand how complex this is, you'll have an insight that people do things, they they are doing it and they're not doing it, but they are doing it and they're not doing it, and it's not a stira. You have to understand what is.

We have very little understanding. And this is the the chochma that the Oibershter gave us to poshut open up our minds. Okay. So that's just recapping where we're where we're up to.Now, we're going to go, all of this is m'Toiraso for me of Rabbi Losh.

The Rambam doesn't mention any of this, but it's so gevaldig to be able to see it, to understand the numbers that we will address in the 15th chapter, instead of just being mekabel it, which is the iker, that's how Yidden does, but you'll understand a lot better what the Rambam is talking about. Yes. How did Rambam figure all this out? The Rambam was mekabel some of it from the the chochma from certain sfarim that gathered from the Jewish people. As the Rambam writes, I think in the end of the 19th chapter.

In other words, Hashem taught us to Moshe Rabbeinu. And this was a knowledge that we were unique in. Am chacham v'navon. Only only God knows this.

And because of the galus, some of it that the goyim retained was partially lost from the Jewish people. And therefore when we went back to relearn it from the goyim, we got it really from Toras Moshe. And Rabbi Losh wants to add something? Yeah. You can speak loud, yeah? Yeah, I I I don't remember where I saw it, but the Rambam says I I befriended the son of a very big astronomer in the Arab lands, and he proved to me and he showed me that it has to be this way.

how correct this is. And once it's proven, if it's proven, that's what it is. Okay.Now, not only, this is so beautiful, are we going to explain why the 13 3 movement is and not. And the the answer will be, and that will be the meaning of the words nekudah hanichaches, don't worry.

But we will also give various other hakdamos which will be foundational to understand what the Rambam is trying to achieve in the 15th chapter. The reading it inside is going to be relatively easy. But the iker of this class is going to be the hakdamos that the Rambam doesn't write, that we are all benefiting from the teachings of Rabbi Losh. Okay.

So now listen to this. And now we have to pick up the camera. And there are words that our chachamim, not the Rambam, uses concerning the three, but Rabbi Losh to make our people from our generation, right, that we ate a lot of mosros, so there's a bissel timtum ha'moach, you give colors, colors helps. Okay, so here let's go.

What I'm saying, we the three, the three that are have the earth in the middle, we're going to call the red, the blue, and the green. Use the blue alone. Now, the red and the blue, the red we're going is called by our chachamim domeh. I'll explain soon why it's called domeh.

The blue is called noteh. I'll explain soon why it's called noteh. And the green is called yoitzeh.Let me show you what I mean by the red and the blue, and we'll get to the green in a in a second. So here, you see why the Oibershter made hula hoops? You thought for whatever.

This is why the Oibershter made this. This is the red and the blue. The red and the blue affect each other. The movement of the red affects the blue.

But, but let me show like this. As we explained in the intro to Perek Yud Beis, that when the the mazalos, the center of the the direction of the mazalos is not under the equator. We're speaking about taking the equator of the world and throwing it to the Galgal Hashi'i. The belt of the mazalos is not under the equator, but the belt of the mazalos goes off goes off the equator by 23 and a half degrees to each direction.

The word, the reason why we're calling the red domeh because it's similar to the kav hamazalos. This red, right, which is the outermost galgal of the galgalei halevana is not centered in a way, and we're not talking about the earth in the middle or the earth off. No, no, no, we're speaking about, is it over the equator? No. It's domeh to the kav hamazalos.

Now I want you to watch this movement. If this is turning, and it's affecting the next galgal of the moon that's called noteh. Noteh means it's off. Off from what? It's being affected by the red, but if you can watch the if the red is bediyuk under the kav hamazalos, as it turns, the blue is off.

It's moving the blue, it's schlepping the blue, it's amazing, ah? It's schlepping the blue, but look how the direction of the blue is constantly changing. How much is it off the kav hamazalos, which is the red? Five mailos to each direction.They're different by the fact that they're not aligned under the kav hamazalos. The red is, the domeh is, and the word the noteh is, it's not, it's noteh. It's going off.

But they are both equal that the earth is in the center of it. Now this is very important. Remember yesterday by the by the shiur of the shemesh, that was the relatively easy compared to what's coming in front of you. Gird girdle your loins, they say, because now you're going to be overwhelmed with information.

The earth being in the center of the red and the blue makes the cheshbon a lot easier if that's the only thing Hashem would have made, because then whatever it is, b'yachas where you are by the mazalos, if you are on the red and the blue, it's going to appear the same way to you because you are aligned. Problem is, the challenge is, the fun is, is that inside the blue, you have the green. And the green, Rabbi Losh did not need to put here. noch a nes, it would be very complicated.

The green, but it's very easy to see. The green, like we learned yesterday with our colors. Remember yesterday guys, that we had the blue and the red, and we pointed out that the Gova HaShemesh was the red. So the green, you see there's a gova.

You see the the gova of the green? In other words, if the earth is in the center, the center of the green is here, not here. The center of the green is here, the earth is here. The center of the green is here. And the gova of the green, which is affected by the blue, right? The movement of the blue will affect where the gova is.

We're not even talking about the moon, we're just speaking about the gova of the green, is that sometimes the gova means it's the furthest away from the earth. The closest to out there, to the off the of the speaker. You're not being You're not being heard clearly. speaker.

Okay, I'll try again. Is it better yakir now or worse? Is it better? Yeah, yeah. I think I covered, I might have covered something. So you have to chap this gova thing.

The gova means that since the the blue is holding the green, the green is not centered in the blue. The green is not centered in the blue. Which makes, let's say, center means that let's say relative to the earth, which is here, some parts of the green are very close to the earth, and some parts of the green are very far from the earth. The gova of the yoreach, like we learned yesterday, the Gova HaShemesh.

Remember yesterday we had the blue and the red? So since the red we learned yesterday was not inside the blue equal, that means that there's going to be a place where the gova, forget about the moon, we'll get to the moon soon, just the gova, there's a place in the green that's further away from the earth and a place that's closer. A gova will affect the distortion between the emtzai and the amiti. That's what we learned yesterday. That if, you know, it's even after you know where the moon is, because of the gova, you're going to have to do a final step of figuring out, well, that's where the moon is if you're in the if you are in the blue and the green.

But since the center, you're in the center of the blue, but you're not in the center of the green. So when you look at the moon vis-a-vis, where is it? Which address of the mazalos? You'll have a different address. The emtzai will be the address of the green concerning the mazalos. The amiti, the ultimate step will be where is the address of the moon concerning me.

And the only cheshbon at the end that we need to know to know whether there's a molad or not is when you know where the sun is in the amiti, and then when you know where the moon is in the amiti. But we're not there yet. Just to point out that the green is the one that's called yoitzeh, right? Because it's off center and it has a gova.Now, we began this class by asking the question or by saying a fact that even though the little galgal that's turning in the green, it's turning in the green. Emes 13.3.

Nisht emes 13.3. It's really going quicker. After the molad it's going quicker. Now, we're going to see a phenomenon in a moment, an amazing phenomenon.

Every molad happens when the gova of the levana is the closest to the sun. A molad means, you see the black line and the black line? A molad means that the sun and the moon are aligned from our perspective. Or shortly afterwards when they go off a little bit, which means the sun is going to be a little bit more in the maarav, the moon is going to be less in the mizrach, that is when we're going to see the new moon. The molad happens exactly when the moon, when the gova is the furthest away from the earth.

Amazing. Always. And which is great. I want you to know that when the gova is exactly aligned the highest to the sun, you will never have to make the adjustment between the emtzai and the amiti.

The adjustment only has to be made because it's not on the gova. But hold on. I want to first explain why is it that it's after the molad it appears to us that it's going quicker than the 13.3. So here we go.

That the answer is, is that when you have, we're using a very professional prop with the other very professional prop. We're learning the the shecheinu over here. So under shecheinu, look at the line that Rabbi Losh with a lot of talent drew a very, very artistic line. I don't know if it can be seen b'chlal.

So let's go like this. Yeah, yeah. Okay guys, look at this. When you have something that's moving, I'm going to get to the movements in a second.

When you have something that's moving, whether it's going to this direction or whether it's going to that direction, you have to place a point which is the base for the movement. Right? If the base is here, if you move this base down, if you move the base down, even if it's going to be moving the same amount of shetach, it's going to cover a different amount of degrees. Rabbi Losh is shaking the head, could be I'm saying it right, he doesn't say it that way, but that's the way I'm going to try to say it, and if I'm wrong, I apologize from from all of you guys.What is amazing is that normally, like we said, the green has its own center. So you would say that you move it based on the center of the green, but you don't do that.

Not only do you not make the point from where this movement is happening. Not only is it not from the center of the green, which in our picture will be the top of the white. Not only do you not make it from the center of the blue and the red, which is the middle, the center of the earth. The same space you have from the top of the white to the middle, you add from the middle to the bottom.

That's called the nekudah hanichaches. And the movement will begin from the bottom, which is from here, from here, and not from here. So unlike the sun, that in the sun we we do get to be kovea the ikar, the the tchilas hanekudah. Here we go down below the center.

Very good. By the sun, the movement, the sun, the emtzai. The sun we takeh made the movement from the middle of the sun, and then you have to later figure out what to do with the amiti. Very good yakir.

And it goes steady. And it go, and therefore it's steady. And therefore it's steady. steady degrees.

Steady degrees. The Nun Ches Tes is steady. Here, because, now one second, one second, one second. Now let me give you another final very important numbers over here.

Now this is going to blow your mind. So let's go back to last chapter. We said that yeah, that the moon is going every day around 13 degrees. The moon is going b'erech every day 13 degrees mi'maarav l'mizrach.

The Galgal HaYomi is going 361 mi'mizrach l'maarav. The sun is going b'erech one degree mi'maarav l'mizrach. We said the moon is going like the sun, but that's a very, very general statement that we're going to now break into pieces and it's going to blow your mind. We said, ah, the moon is going 13 degrees.

Yes and no. What's the yes and no? The We let's go to the red and to the blue and to the green. To the red and to the blue and to the green. You should know my friends, that that the the the the red and the blue, the red and the blue are actually going, listen to this, 11.12 mi'mizrach l'maarav, Ribono Shel Olam.

The red and the blue, Yiddelekh are going like the Galgal HaYomi. Of course, more than the Galgal HaYomi, because the Galgal HaYomi is anyways taking everything with it. It's going in the direction from mizrach l'maarav 11.12. Aval, let's go to the green.

That's the trick here. Don't forget, the green is holding the little galgal. The Emtza HaYoreach is the middle of the little galgal. The green is going 24 23, 24 23 mi'maarav l'mizrach.

So when you take the 11.12 minus the 24.23, that's your 13. But this is very important. Why is it very important? Because what's really happening every day, right? From the perspective of the galgalim of the yoreach to the perspective of the mazalos. Forget about the earth, forget about the Galgal HaYomi.

When we're saying that the red and the blue are moving 11, it's actually going more l'maarav. Guys, the sun is going from maarav l'mizrach. Two of these galgalim, the outermost, the red are going it's going from mizrach l'maarav 11, it should be here. On the mazalos.

On the mazalos. But now you put the 24.23 and now you're going to be l'mizrach, you're going to be the 13 because you deduct this from that. Okay. So now when we're speaking about the nekudah hanichaches, don't forget guys, this movement every day is a lot.

It's 24 23, it's not 13. The green is moving every day 24 23. in the blue. In the blue.

In the blue. Now here's the thing. When it's making the movement, again you need to have a point from where it moves. It's like when you put this this um compass, when you put this uh instrument that you make a circle with, there's the point that you put in the center and then you make the circle.

It's not in the center of the green, the 24, look if the 24 would be placed in the in the center of the green, then the 24 guys, look at the picture would end up over here. If I'm going to move the same amount, but I'm going to put the center in the nekudah hanichaches, the same amount will cover much less space. it has nothing to do with it. Not this.

Has to do with the small galgal. The small galgal, I'm sorry. Okay okay okay one second. So I'm I'm Okay I'm sorry.

So now we have the the green is over here in 24. Now we have over here. Now the small galgal, the small galgal that's moving we said 13.3. If the 13.3 would be from the middle, and don't forget guys, the 13.3 of the little galgal is also going mi'mizrach l'maarav.

That's the key. That's what we learned yesterday. So it's also going mi'mizrach l'maarav 13. So if it would be from the middle of the green, because the little galgal is in the green, then going back, then the movement back, No, s'geit nisht doh.

It's just the reference. Where is the where is the You you take the you start to count. You start to count from the top of the little galgal, right? Correct. And that what means top? Top has the top has to have that point and since Since the center Since the point is off center to the opposite direction since the center moves so the top the top will move automatically Whenever you move the center, the what I call the base, the top the nekudah hanichaches, the movement will move together with it.

So look at this. If I'm over here, I'm going I have two centers rabbi, but in the simplest way you can say it. Simplest way is is that is that is that when you move the nekudah hanichaches on on the galgalim, you're going to have less mi'maarav l'mizrach. It's going to be more mi'mizrach l'maarav.

Rabbi Losh is coming over here. Okay. Let's put it like this. Yes.

Now here, that's going to be the that will be the center of the long galgal. Now this is turning, right? Now the top is here. The top of the of the small galgal, let's say is over here. in in in in reference to who is the top over here? Let's say the whole line over here is the same line, so will be the top over here.

Now what happens if I move that that the center that that the center where where it's turning is not it's going to be over here. It's it should have been over here because that's That's the center of the green. Yeah, yeah. But it's it's not going to be over here, it's going to be over here.

Nekudah neged the the the middle of where we are, the earth. Now let's say when we move it, we move it like uh Now we move it this way. That's right. We move it like this.

Now look what happens now. Before the center was over here. So that was number one. Now if the center is over here, the nekudah hanichaches, now in other words automatically, besides that it turns around himself, so the whole galgal will move like this.

What happens? It moved. So before, let's say the levana was over here, now when we move it, now the levana is already moved up more to mizrach. Because and and that center is very movable. It's not it's like you see over here because the more this moves, the more the more this nekudah will move and the more adjustment we're going to need.

The adjustment is, instead of just saying take the movement of the 13 3 and that is the movement, since the point, the base of that movement is much lower, so it's going to be it's lower, it's a different point. So therefore the location in the heavens, as far as we are concerned, it's not going 13 3. closer to them. It's actually it's going to it's going to be it's going to be for us more Moon goes more, more than The moon is going to be going more.

The moon is going to be going more. So that's the first type of cheshbon that we're going to have to make. Now one second, we're not done yet. Let's go back to what we said before, now that we have this up here, that the gova by by by the every molad, the gova of the green is the closest to the sun.

The gova is the furthest away from the earth. Now that we explained that really from these three galgalim, from these four galgalim, it's really two different movements. The red and the blue, the answer is 12, but again, how do you get to the 12 yakir? Because the red and the blue are going 11 mi'mizrach l'maarav. It's only 11 away, but the sun who's going in the other direction one is going 11, farshteist? You go 11 one way, the sun goes one on the other way, you have 12.

When it comes to the green, when it comes to the yoitzeh, when it comes to the to the Galgal HaYoitzeh, the Galgal HaYoitzeh is going 13 degrees, but it's going 13 degrees. degrees mizrach. we said parenthetically, it's not going 13. It's going 24, 23, but you deduct the other direction.

So it's going 13. But since the sun is going in the same direction one, you it have 12.12, you understand? So remember that there's a a a a double opposite directions which will be used in the words merchak kaful as we'll see in a moment. Now listen to this. We mentioned that the govah of the yareach of the green is always going to be the furthest away from the earth every time there's a molad.

Why is that? Because since this as we just mentioned, the govah is being carried by the blue. The blue is moving 11 maalos every day. 11 30 is 330. That means every 30 days, right? It's going to be it's going to be 30 degrees away from where it started because every sivuv has 360.

It only went 330. The sun itself went 30 in the opposite direction. So when are they going to meet? They they will always meet every 30 days be'erech. And therefore, since in the beginning, the molad was when the Govah HaYareach was the furthest away from the earth, since it's going to be done every 30 days and every 30 days, that's exactly where the Govah HaYareach is going to be.

So just to know that the by the molad, the Govah HaYareach is always in the same place. Problem is, is that to see the moon, you don't see the moon when the molad actually happened or when they are actually aligned. You can only see the moon around 20 hours later, and sometimes a lot more than that. Don't forget, you only see the moon, like we mentioned, right after the shkiah.

So you have to know when the molad happens. Sometimes the molad can happen at a time that the only time it's going to be possible to see it is in the next night. The next shkiah. But you need to have a minimum of 20 days.

The little galgal, forget about where the moon is and the the little galgal is moving like we said 13.3. And then you have the cheshbon what the means the nekudah hanichachas is, which has to be adjusted the whole time. It's moving a certain amount of space. You have to chapn what's going on with it.

Now once you see the molad, it won't be by the govah. It will not be by the govah. The govah is only during the molad. It's going to be off the govah.

That will that will create the need like we mentioned, like we find by the sun, to have to adjust the emtza'i to the amiti. Different thing, but that will also demand such an adjustment. Okay. Now, another another important thing over here.

When it comes to the little galgal, when it comes to the little galgal, we never mentioned how little is it? So coming back. Yaker, coming This point is moving, we said, 13 degrees every day. This point. The yareach is not in the middle.

The yareach is on the outer parts of it. The diameter is 10 degrees. Which means from the emtza hayareach to either extremes, you have the max of 5 degrees. 5 degrees means that even when the emtza hayareach is right directly by the govah, depending where the moon is, the moon is going to be max 5 degrees off.

Really the Rambam will write in this chapter 5.1, we'll explain that at the end. So that's something that you have to be aware of. Now, final introduction. The final introduction is like this.

The Rambam writes in Perek Yud Zayin, how many degrees does the moon have to be off the sun in order for you to be able to see it? And you have to know something in the bottom probably has to be adjusted, that that that is that is foundational here. Because when no no no, something in the bottom has to be adjusted. In other words, this tripod, there's something that has to be that has to be there's like nuts. You have to connect the nut and one nut got loose.

One nut got loose. It's a nut, it's a nut, it's something on the leg. There's knees on the leg. u'v'gashmiyus.

So Rabbi Leish is very good with galgalim, but with a tripod, a tripod is too simple. Tripod is stam boring. Okay, we'll get we'll deal with that in a minute. So chevreh help out.

You got it Rabbi Leish? No, I don't Don't hold don't hold it. Pick it What what Look, look at the legs. One of the legs I got weak. One of the legs is loose, so you have to you have to nut it, you have to close it.

It does how could you make it should One of those nuts, one of those nuts got loose. Okay, let's go weiter. I'm gonna come back and finish know, I'm gonna go back and fix it right now. I'm coming right back guys.

This is part of the fun. This is part of the fun. the whole thing falls down. Leggo leggo leggo leggo.

No but then I won't be able to see your head when you Okay, that's fine. Okay. Alright. The Rambam writes in Perek Yud Zayin that the moon can only be seen when it's minimally nine maalos off the sun.

Prior to that, the moon is so little that you cannot see it. The Rambam writes in Perek Yud Zayin that after the moon is 24 maalos away from the sun, vadai it could be seen. Between 9 and 24 is you have to know other conditions which will allow you to know whether it's seeable or not. Now the Sanhedrin they have to know whether it's seeable or not.

mitzad echad, we're mekadesh ideally al pi hare'iyah. Means we have to hear it from the eidim. Just knowing the cheshbonos is not the ideal way of making a calendar. But when eidim come, if Beis Din has to know the cheshbonos because if the moon is not away from the sun nine maalos, it's less than nine maalos, it was not seen.

So they know the eidim are lying. Not maliciously maliciously, they saw cholom, they saw a cloud. The Rambam will write about that later. If it's more than 24, then it's shayach, vadai it's seeable.

Does it mean that these eidim are saying the truth? You have to make a chakirah, you have to interrogate them. You don't want to have people that are stam lying. But the fact is is that it's seeable. That's the numbers in Perek Yud Zayin.

9, 24. Here in this chapter in Perek Tes Vov, the numbers that Rambam is going to give, now that I moved the tripod, I lost my papers, but I'll do this bal peh with Rabbi Leish in front of me. The numbers that Rambam gives is 5 and 62. Ribono Shel Olam.

5 and 62. Hello, 9:24. How can you see it five if you have to have nine? So here's the you have to remember like this, that we learned in the previous chapters by the sun that there is an off from the center of the red and the center of the blue by the sun and that's two degrees. Makes a big effect, two degrees.

We we learned right now that when we speak about the emtza hayareach, you have five degrees on each side that the moon can go actually five here, five here. Five and two is seven. Okay. Now another thing you have to know.

And that is that when we spoke about the merchak kaful. When we spoke about the merchak kaful as I explained. So there are certain numbers that whatever the distance between the sun and the moon is, really you're going to have to double that to be able to make the adjustment as we explained because of the red and the blue and the green are going in opposite directions over here, big time. That makes a double difference.

It's 12 12, but it's whatever the number is, you have to double it. So therefore, when the Rambam writes, so first of all, there's five and two is seven. When the Rambam begins with number five, based on the merchak kaful, five can actually mean only two and a half. Two and a half and seven is nine.

So the nine that the Rambam writes in Perek Yud Zayin becomes five over here because the five in this chapter, because of the merchak kaful is really two and a half. And we just explained that really there's a seven degrees in adjustment. Now it's not always seven because sometimes it's going in the same direction. It's not always going to be, but it could be it's going to be in a oifen that between the two degrees of the sun and between the five degrees like we just showed, could be it's going to make a cheshbon of seven.

Seven and two is nine. That's mitzad the five. On the other hand, the Rambam in Perek Tes Vov is going to speak adjustments until 62. And again, you can make adjustments olam va'ed, but once you're more than the 24 of Perek Yud Zayin, you don't have to give the cheshbonos because Beis Din knows that it's shayach that they saw it.

All they have to do is interrogate them. The cheshbon is because maybe they did, maybe they didn't. So is it 24 or is it 62? Ah, merchak kaful. In this chapter, we're going to be using the merchak kaful number.

So 62 is really 31. Now let's take the seven that we said. 7 minus the 31 is 24. 7 minus the 31 is 24.

So it's exactly the same number. There's one more stirah that we're going to have at the end of the chapter that we spoke about the the the amount that the moon actual the actual moon is going on the little galgal five to each direction. We're going to have something بناגע benogea when you're standing on the kadur ha'aretz, how much is it moving? How much does this movement represent in the mazalos? Here we have five. The Rambam is going to write a number 5.1 and we're going to leave that to the end of this class.

Without any further ado, without any further ado, we're going to open up our Rambam. And Rabbi Leish can you can can mit dorten? Yo yo. bemamesh gavaldik. the better less, you see the better.

Oh, this is very humbling. Perek Chamisha Asar. Now. How many people have read up their own heads? Daniels or are just basically going I I would I would I would say like this guys, that I sat here last night and I went over these numbers with with Rabbi Leish.

And then we went over today again, and then we went over it again, and then we learned inside and went over again. And I think I have it. I know I'm overwhelmed, but I'm confident because he's here. So if I say something wrong, he'll correct me.

I think again, based on technology, to appreciate that if this information that I'm giving over with Hashem's help is таки takeh correct, then you have to learn it again and again and again and again. And before that, you have to begin to think like a sphere. You know, just just this hula hoop is so helpful because you have to get used to these movements. In other words, we're trying to say that when you're trying to find the place of the moon in the sky, like the nekudah hanichachas.

Like I gave the right numbers, but I think Kaven, what you're trying to point out is, is that you have to appreciate what the nekudah hanichachas does, is that since the base of the movement is not where you think it is, so when you're going to look, you know it's traveling 13. You're going to look in the sky, you will not find it there. So therefore you're going to it's moving quicker. Sometimes it's moving 13, but since you misplace the center, bederech mimelah everything is different.

That's something that if you have a model, you see it be'einayim, you'll understand it. And if you don't have a model, then with a little bit of yegiah, when you learn it and you learn it and you think about it and you think about it, then you're zocheh, you dream about it, then you see it, then you get it. Okay, but coming back over here. Here, like we began as the beginning of the intro was, is that you we're looking to make an adjustment to find out where is the moon in the emtza hayareach.

Before you put the moon in the emtza hayareach, we just pointed out, you have to know where the emtza hayareach is. So we said yesterday the number, it's going 13 10. The emtza hayareach every day. And we said that the little galgal is doing 13 3.

But you still have to add this first adjustment, which has to do with the nekudah hanichachas. Let's go inside. Halacha Aleph. Perek Chamisha Asar has nine halachos starting with Halacha number one.

Im tirtzeh leida makom hayareach ha'amiti bechol yom shetirtzeh. And again makom hayareach ha'amiti will be because at the end, right the end goal is yareach amiti. That's the end. But we're going to be learning right now before we get to the amiti is to know where is it in the galgal in in in the galgal of the in the moon? The amiti there's really two amitis.

Let me say like this. The bottom line amiti is, let's go back to Rabbi Leish's example, is that again everything is to find out the molad. You have to know where the sun is, you have to know where the moon is. Like we said by the sun.

The sun is where the sun appears to be in the address of the mazalos if you will be standing in the red. But then because of the two degree difference is where it looks when when you're when you're standing on kadur ha'aretz. Same thing will be same thing will be with the levanah. The govah halevanah, if the moon will be in the govah halevanah when you see the moon, no problem.

The same place where the moon is in the moon, the same place on kadur ha'aretz. The moment you go away from the govah, which is happening the moment you go away from the molad every single month, then you have to you're going to have to make an ultimate adjustment to know where the moon will appear to you in the mazalos to know when it got aligned, and then the erech it takes around 20 hours after the alignment for it to be seen, if it's shayach to be seen. Okay. Im tirtzeh leida makom hayareach ha'amiti bechol yom shetirtzeh, kodem kol toitzi techilas emtza hayareach.

emtza hayareach is the point in middle of the galgal katan. The point in middle of the galgal katan. The point in middle of the galgal katan. Vehu lailah shetirtzeh.

Vechen toitzi emtza hamaslul. emtza hamaslul is the moon is on the small galgal. Moon is not the moon is not in the middle. The moon is on the periphery of the small galgal that we said is going 13.3.

13.3, that's not really 13.3, but it's 13.3. You will also have to know the emtza hashemesh. Why do you have to know the emtza hashemesh? Because I have to know how many degrees is the moon of the shemesh. And if you remember again, we on one hand we said it's 12 degrees every day, but then we explained the merchak kaful in the introduction.

The merchak kaful is how much is the emtza hayareach away from the emtza hashemesh. That number has to be doubled. So to get to that number, you have to know also where the emtza hashemesh is. le'oisah ha'eis.

which will be the final part of this chapter. The Rambam in the beginning says what he's going to do in this chapter. I'm not talking about the emtza hashemesh benogea the emtza'i ve'amiti. No.

How far you can say yes, it's 12 degrees away every day. But because of the the the cheshbonos the 11.12 and the 24 right? And the 24.23, I think. Because of that we actually had this concept of merchak kaful and merchak kaful from the shemesh. You have to know where the shemesh is.

You have to know where the emtza hayareach is and then you have to do the merchak kaful. All of that will help you finally come to find the place of the moon. Another thing Rabbi Leish is saying that the emtza hashemesh and the emtza hayareach, they have beineihem a very regular distance every month. A very steady number every month, which is very helpful.

And the amiti are very regular. And the amiti is not is not the same. Okay. Now Vetirah emtza hashemesh ve'emtza hayareach vehanishar tichpol le'osef this distance like I mentioned 12 from one hand and 12 on the other hand, you have to know the distance will have to be doubled and the double is called merchak kaful.

Halacha Beis. Vekvar hodainu she'ein levanah muchar becheshbon elah miderech elu. But the Rambam saying there's a lot more to say. Like the Rambam didn't give us Rabbi Leish's red, blue and green because he didn't need to.

It's good for us to understand what's going on over here. Like why do you have a merchak kaful? Why are we doubling Why are we doubling the distance between the sun and the moon? For what why do we Now you understand Rambam saying I'm only giving you the numbers that you need to know in order to be able to know when to make the molad. And don't forget, the moment the moon is less if the moon is less than the sun 9 degrees, there's nothing to know. There's nothing to know.

And we explained that the nine degrees that we're going to learn in Perek Yud Zayin here it means five. If the moon is further away from the sun 24 degrees in Perek Yud Zayin, in this chapter it means 62 degrees based on the merchak kaful as we explained with the readjustment, then vadai yera'eh. If it's vadai going to be seen, that Rambam is not teaching you astronomy here leshem astronomy. Where is an adjustment needed? Whenever it's in between, let's go to these numbers of the chapters of this number, between 5 and 62, maybe yeah, maybe not.

But you have to know how to how to you have to make these adjustments. And after you make all these adjustments, now you'll know befo'al mamash whether it whether you saw it or whether you didn't see it. Because when you make these adjustments, you will know that if it was takeh let's say 20 hours after the molad, yeah, it was possible for it to be seen if that was right after shkiah. And as we learned yesterday, you have the ideal 20 minutes after shkiah to see it.

Ule'olam i efshar sheyera'eh merchak zeh hakkaful balailah hare'iyah sheyera'eh hayareach elah mechamesh maalos merchak hakkaful ad shtayim veshishim maalos merchak hakkaful Ve'yiheyeh efshar sheyosef al zeh velo yigra mimenu. Now Halacha Gimmel Halacha Gimmel. Im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful chamesh maalos o karov lechamesh then it's such a no adjustment will be needed ein chosheshim letosefes leteres alav. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mishesh maalos ad achas esrei maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul.

The emtza hamaslul is where is the moon on the little where is the moon on the little galgal you'll have to add one maalah. And don't forget all of this is predicated on the intro that we gave that the little galgal is moving 13.3 but it's not exactly 13.3. Okay you have the nekudah hanichachas. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mishtaim esrei maalos ad shmoneh esrei maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul shtei maalos.

Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mitisha esrei maalos ad arba ve'esrim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul shalosh maalos. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mechamesh ve'esrim maalos ad achas usheloshim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul arba maalos. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mishtayim usheloshim maalos ad shmoneh usheloshim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul chamesh maalos. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful metisha usheloshim maalos ad chamesh ve'arba'im maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul shesh maalos.

Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mishesh ve'arba'im maalos ad achas vechamishim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul sheva maalos. Ve'im yiheyeh merchak hakkaful mishtayim vechamishim maalos ad tesha vechamishim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul shmoneh maalos. I want everyone to know like this I'm talking to myself that when we learn Torah we should know that we don't know. We don't know.

When we learn a geshmake sugya and when we're zocheh to learn pnimiyus haTorah and you feel like you're touching your yechidah there's so much more that we don't know. So for the people here that that are not chapen it I think the first takeaway is is that even what you think you chap we also don't chap. It's very humbling. And and the goal is not to have the knowledge the goal is to have the Eibershter.

Hashem put himself in this knowledge. This is Torah. humbling and depressing. No no that's I'm happy you said those words.

Is that is that humbling is depressing if a person has a a gaivah ego which we all have so if takeh it depresses the ego which is a beautiful thing even though it's very painful. But from the godly soul's perspective it's humbling because you know when we think we get something and yakira the chochmah is so beautiful. When people get this you shine. That's good and bad.

It's good because you're getting it. It's bad because there's much more here. And and if I think I have it I'm closed to what's greater. Like why did Hashem make the levanah so complicated? Because the Shechinah it's the Shechinah like like the we don't get it we don't get we we have to get it and we have to know tachlis hayediah that we don't know.

So it's easy So you didn't We never get women. Yeah and and the goyim they don't understand the Jewish people. we're different people. It's a different thing completely.

It's not natun it's not predictable it's unpredictable. You're going in two directions at the same time and then one sent in the nekudah hanichachas. The nekudah hanichachas is such a gevaldike thing like oh my god. Ve'im yiheyeh hamerchak hakkaful I say it's 12 degrees no no no no no 12 means 24.

Yeah? It's like money owed to the bank God forbid. You think you owe 12 before you blink you owe them 24. Plus everything is doubled. Im yiheyeh hamerchak hakkaful mishesh vechamishim maalos ad shalosh veshishim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul tesha maalos.

Guys what we are looking for We're looking for where to place the moon on the little galgal. That's what we're looking for. And don't tell me since I know where the emtza hayareach is which I know from the last chapter how much it's moving every day and since I know that this is moving again the little the little galgal is moving 13 3 so I'll know you won't know. You won't know.

You have to make these adjustments and only then will you know where is the moon where is the moon concerning the mazalos. That's what we're looking for. We're looking for the the adjustment that you have to make why the numbers that we add in the previous chapter 13 10 and 13 3 are not enough to know where the moon actually is. You have to make these adjustments.

Okay we're in the end we're in the end of Halacha Gimmel. Ve'im yiheyeh hamerchak hakkaful mishishim maalos veshalosh veshishim maalos tosef al emtza hamaslul tesha maalos. Ma sheyiheyeh emtza hamaslul acharei hatosefos elu zeh nikra hamaslul hanachon. In other words now you know when you learn Halacha Gimmel you know where the moon is in or on the little galgal.

You know it's right place. So now we're getting somewhere. Now we now at least I know if I would be over there in the galgal of the levanah where am I? Vu bin ich? I found myself. America.

I found myself. If you want to find yourself go learn these dinim. Then you'll find yourself. So you did Okay Halacha Daled.

Now hold on. Ve'acharei kach tireh kamah maalos hu hamaslul hanachon. In other words now we are going like we did yesterday in the Rambam by the sun everything now is the emtza'i. Everything now is the emtza'i.

Now you have to go to the amiti. Now you have to go to the amiti. You don't have the amiti you have nothing again. That's Halacha Daled further.

Ve'acharei kach tireh kamah maalos hu hamaslul hanachon like this. Im hayah pachus mimeah ushmonim maalos. Because by 180 you're veiter good. Then Tireh menaseh hamaslul hazeh hanachon be'emtza hayareach leshe'avar hayah.

By the way we did this by the sun. Remember that? The adjustment because the cent because of it's not in the same center. Because the green the center of the green in which is the galgal hakatan has a different center. The earth is not in its center.

Rabbi Leish is looking at me. beklal lo I take back that whole statement. Here we're going from the emtza'i to the amiti in the mazalos. In the mazalos not on planet earth.

We're going from the emtza'i to the amiti of the mazalos. Unlike the sun. Unlike the sun. Very good.

Unlike the sun. Now why is it off the mazalos? Because could we counted the whole time emtza hayareach the middle of the of the of the small galgal. But the yareach is not in the middle of the small galgal. Ah that's it.

Okay thank you. Okay here we go here we go. Before before we go into the sun step. Don't forget guys we were speaking the whole time about the emtza hayareach.

The moon is not in the emtza hayareach. The moon is on the outer part. And as we mentioned it goes it goes off five degrees in every direction. But like we said the speeds are not equal.

So therefore you have to know how to make those adjustments. I think I said correct with the adjustment has to be made because as you go higher or lower As long as as soon as it's not on the As long as it's not on the govah or the bottom or in the bottom then you have to You have to make an adjustment. Okay. As long as it's not on the top and on the bottom where it's on the top and the bottom everything is aligned.

You can't see we can't see. You can't see. In other words until until now we were talking about where this is. But now I'm saying something else that I'm looking up over here from here if the levanah is here or if the levanah is here wherever the levanah sees itself on the mazalos I'll see the same thing.

Like over here will be over here. But the moment the moon goes could be aligned with the middle of the small galgal. It's going to be aligned with the middle of the small galgal. already know where the small galgal is.

In other words we began the cheshbon from this point. Very good. This is the emtza hayareach. Okay I got it I got very good very good.

Okay let's go back to Rabbi Leish. This is the emtza hayareach. The moon is not on the emtza hayareach. The moon is on the outer part.

Now let me ask you a question if I'm standing on here yeah and I want to know where is the emtza hayareach by the mazalos. And I'll get an address. If the moon is going to be either by degree 360 or degree 180 it will be exactly the same. It will be exactly the same wherever this is this will be.

Wherever this is this will be. The moment the moon is going away either between 360 180 between 180 and 360 then the address that we gave for the emtza hayareach will not be the same address for where the moon is for where the moon is. Got it? That is what they were that is what we are adjusting. Rabbi Leish is shaking his head.

it's very interesting. In other words when when when the Rambam gave us the where the yareach the ikkar where the yareach is. So if there wouldn't be any distractions that we have over here the nekudah hanichachas so we would always be able to pinpoint exactly where the moon is in the mazalos. Because even though the yareach is also sometimes high sometimes low but the Rambam looks he doesn't care about it doesn't bother him.

But the sun there is no small galgal and he still adjusts the Correct. Here he doesn't adjust so the the main reason why it looks like he doesn't adjust it like we said before because always by the molad the the moon will be on on top. So it's going to be off just a little bit it won't make such a big difference. So it doesn't Okay okay very good.

So listen to this here listen to these words. So in other words all we have to do is is adjust the emtzoi yareach to the middle. to the middle. Okay okay okay this is very good.

Emtzoi Chama Okay okay okay very good. Okay okay. By the sun, yareach kid, we needed to adjust the emtzoi of the sun to the amiti by us. Exception of the gova.

Why? Because of the gova. We also said that when the sun is in the gova, then no adjustment is needed. But the sun is never always by the gova. Need at the sun.

The molad is not always When the molad happens, the sun is not always in the gova. That's why by the sun we needed more to deal with that adjustment from the from the emtzoi to the amiti. The Rambam, let's go back. I said wrong in the beginning of Halacha Dalet.

The Rambam does not have to adjust the moon like the sun. Why? Because since the molad always happens when when when you are by the when the when the moon is by the place in the green that's the furthest away from the earth that always happens, even though you only see the moon 20 hours later or a little bit later, that difference is not that significant. But what we're learning now is significant. What is significant? That since we gave the place of the emtza hayareach, well yasher koach, if the moon is 360 or 180, then you're good.

But since the moon is going under galgal hakatan, and you're going off that 90 degrees here, which is 5 degrees, 90 degrees there, 5 degrees here, that will affect huge where the moon will appear in the mazalos. That's the adjustment that we have to make. And that will be the amiti by the moon. That will be the amiti by the moon.

So the amiti of the sun and the amiti of the moon are not exactly, we're not looking to gain the same thing. Amiti of the sun is that since the center of the red is 2 degrees higher, I have to adjust it by me. The amiti of the moon is that since the molad is always when the gova is already there by the molad. Aye, it's going away from there, nafka mina.

But but the emtza yareach, there's a little galgal. The sun doesn't have a little galgal. The little galgal is schlepping it ten, it go it's going here and there. That is where it gets off.

That's the next adjustment. Rav Eliezer finally is saying that I'm getting a little bit. Baruch Hashem. Okay right now Halacha Hey, u'da, sollst du wissen, she'ein mahalach ha'nochechi that we just so the first part of this chapter was the mahalach ha'nochechi.

Right. This is very important. Where is the moon on the galgal hakatan? If it is like he said meah u'shmonim b'shaveh very good or shlosh meos v'shishim b'shaveh, ein lahem moneh. You don't have to make any adjustments.

Ela yihiyeh hamakom hayareach emtzoi, yareach emtzoi, l'shaah shehu roeh that's the makom amiti for where we're standing or from where when b'riat hamazalos, everything is aligned. But, kama mina shel mahalach what is the adjustment that needs to be made? So the Rambam makes everything simple. If the mahalach ha'nochechi is 10 mailos, then tihiyeh moneh chamishim chalakim. That's the adjustment that you have to make.

V'im tihiyeh mahalach ha'nochechi so you know where to look for, you know if the moon is going to be there. Im ha'mahalach ha'nochechi esrim mailos tihiyeh moneh shtei mailah achat u'shmonah u'shloshim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shloshim tihiyeh moneh shtei mailos v'arba esreh chalakim. V'im yihiyeh arbaim tihiyeh moneh shalosh mailos v'shishim chalakim.

The chochma here Kevin is that Harav got to this number. Then you know that you know. Okay, that's we're not there. V'im yihiyeh chamishim tihiyeh moneh shalosh mailos v'arba v'arbaim chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh shishim tihiyeh moneh arba mailos v'shisha asar chalakim. V'im tihiyeh shivim tihiyeh moneh arba mailos v'echad v'arbaim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shmonim tihiyeh moneh chamesh mailos said that he learned this from the Greeks? The numbers? Some of them Yeah yeah he said he said it writes it at the end. I think he writes it in Perek Yud Ches.

Or he wrote it before. He wrote it. Just to explain that the seder we're learning we are learning a little bit out of seder but either we learned it or about to learn it and we learned it last year. I think in Perek Yud Ches.

I think Yud Ches. 18. Okay. 18 okay.

V'im yihiyeh tishim tihiyeh moneh chamesh mailos v'chamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah tihiyeh moneh chamesh mailos u'shmoneh chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'eser tihiyeh moneh arba mailos v'tesha v'chamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'esrim tihiyeh moneh arba mailos v'arbaim chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh meah u'shloshim tihiyeh moneh arba mailos v'achad asar chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'arbaim tihiyeh moneh shalosh mailos u'shloshim u'shloshah chalakim. just l'ha'ir that Kevin is not even putting up the pictures from Harav Steinsaltz. That's that's ad k'dei kach.

This is a chiddush norah that never happened and never will happen. It's unique for Kiddush Hachodesh. Im sorry I have the audio I know that I know don't be end of chapter seventeen Okay okay the Rambam writes what we spoke about before at the end of 17 which we'll get to in today's shiur. With the help of God and with the help of Rabbi Lorsch.

V'im yihiyeh meah v'chamishim tihiyeh moneh shtei mailos u'shmonah v'arbaim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'shishim tihiyeh moneh mailah achat v'shishim v'chamishah chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'shivim tihiyeh moneh tisha v'chamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'shmonim b'shaveh ein lo moneh k'mo she'be'arnu because 180 and 360 it's all the same.

The emtza from the edges are the same vis-a-vis the mazalos and kadur ha'aretz. Ela makom hayareach amiti hu makom amiti. Now Halacha Zayin. V'im yihiyeh hamalach ha'nochechi yoser al meah u'shmonim mailos.

Here is similar to what he did by the sun. Tigra oso the cheshbon is not how much off one side how much off the other side. You always have to go back to the 360. We had this by the sun.

Tigra meihem shlosh meos v'shishim v'teida moneh k'derech hachashashim shel mahalach hashemesh. V'chein im yihiyeh hamalach chaser al shiurav tikach mah sheyisha'er bein shtei hamonos k'fi hacheser k'mispar mah she'omarnu b'mahalach hashemesh b'moneh shelo kach tosif al hamalach hanochechi b'moneh shelo. Halacha Ches is now tachlis. Tachlis means the Rambam is going to give you a date and he will want to show you where is the moon and where is the moon like an exercise.

This is a this is a practical exercise. If you can chap this exercise it means you understood what you're doing. If you don't get the exercise then you go back to the beginning. You go back you make a heikef.

You go back in the other direction. That's why it goes to this direction to that direction. We're going in all directions. Halacha Ches.

Keitzad harei sheratzinu leida makom hayareach amiti b'tchilas leil Shabbos giving you a date. Sheyom yom sheini l'chodesh Iyar mishana zo which is the Rambam is calling the shnas ha'ikar just to know again we said this yesterday when we learned that shana zu l'Rambam is 4000 Taf Taf Kuf Lamed Ches. Which is probably when he wrote these halachos u'minyan hayamim hagmurim So first how many days from that day until when you want to know until the yom sheini l'chodesh Iyar. Mitchilas leil ikar ad tchilas leil zeh she'anu rotzim leida makom hayareach amiti and again every month we're giving the consistent 29 days the consistent 29 days is again the emtza hashemesh right? and the hashemesh v'hayareach.

That's the consistency. Not from the way it appears to us but the way it is for them. That is where everything is exactly the same. Totzi emtza hashemesh No that's the That's the cycle.

The easy way to do it. Okay. The easy way to get to it. I just want to make it clear the Rambam here is not telling you where to look for the sun because he wants to tell you where to find the molad.

We're not up to there yet. The Rambam simply wants to tell you where is the moon. Afo ha'levana? Levana levana I can't find your moon. Understand? So you know all of the movements and you still can't find the moon.

Totzi emtza hashemesh tchila leil zeh. guys don't forget the merchak hakafuil you know you have to know emtza chamesh u'shloshim mailos u'shmonah u'shloshim chalakim u'shlosh esrei shniyos that's where it is simanam Lach Lach Lach. Now v'totzi emtza hayareach l'sha'ah zu yetzei lecha emtzoi the fact will be shalosh v'chamishim mailos v'shisha u'shloshim chalakim v'tesha u'shloshim shniyos simanam Nun Gimel Lamed Vov Lamed Tes. And now that's the emtza hayareach.

But guys now let's go what we learned in this perek. We don't care we're not looking for the emtza hayareach. We need that as a stepping stone. We're looking for the mahalach we want to know where is the moon.

The emtza hamalach. And now v'totzi hamalach l'zo which is the cheshbonos that we had. yetzei lecha emtzoi meah v'shalosh mailos echad esre v'chalakim v'shesh esre v'arbaim shniyos simanam Kuf Gimel Yud Aleph Mem Vov. And now tigra emtza hashemesh mei'emtza hayareach.

You're going to have yishar shva esrei mailos u'shmonah v'chamishim chalakim u'shtei shniyos. That is the merchak. And again the merchak hakafuil we said when you know the distance you have to double it. Tichpol oso.

Yetzei lecha merchak hakafuil chamesh u'shloshim mailos v'shesh v'chamishim chalakim u'shteim esrei shniyos simanam Lamed Hey Nun Vov Yud Beis. And therefore bottom line now how this adjustment has to be made tosaf al emtza hamalach chamesh mailos k'mo shehaya y'dueinu. on this date v'yetzei lecha hamalach hanochechi meah u'shmonah mailos v'echad asar chalakim. V'ein makpidim al hachalokim min hachalokim k'mo she'biarnu.

We don't have to go further because it won't make a difference to further for the ultimate goal of making finding out when the molad could happen when did it happen where did it happen Where did the molad happen. Halacha Tes. U'vo v'nachkor u'nevakesh al mahalach zeh hamalach ha'nochechi shehu meah v'shmoneh nimtza'im moneh shelo It's adjustment will be chamesh mailos v'chelek echad. Now chamesh mailos v'chelek echad you have to understand my friends that the max that the moon on the mahalach will be away from the emtza is 5 mailos.

will be 5 mailos. It l'chatchila it should never there should never be a need to go more than 5 mailos. Why are we saying 5.1? Why are we saying 5.1? So the mashal Rav Eliezer gave me is like this is that when something is closer to your face it blocks a much wider amount of background. No the Rambam actually says V'im haya tzadik tihiyeh moneh chamesh mailos v'hey chalokim.

Aha I have in my girsa v'chelek echad. No no I went back to the table. I went back to the Okay. So here what he says chamesh mailos hey chalokim.

I just I just what I just wanted to bring out Rav Eliezer wants to Rav Eliezer wants to bring out is that I want to take a look at the circle. If I'm standing if I'm standing very far away from the circle the most it takes up in the mazalos on each side is only is only five. That's the most. The closer up I go the more it's going to block.

The more it's going to block. And not only not only the more it's going to block but instead of this point being the farthest most point the closer I get to the circle a lower point will be the farthest most point. And that's the difference over here in the number and let's leave it at that. That's a bonus.

That's the bonus for today for this perek. Now. Lefi shehamalach hanochechi haya pachot mimeah u'shmonim therefore as we just had the formula tigra hamoneh shehi chamesh mailos v'chelek echad mei'emtza hayareach that's the chelek echad. Again that's just answering.

It's not point one it's chelek echad. yisha'er arbaim u'shmoneh mailos v'chamishim u'shloshah chalakim v'tesha u'shloshim shniyos. Ta'aseh hashniyos chalakim v'tosaf al hachalokim v'nimtza makom hayareach amiti b'sha'ah zu bottom line the Rambam gave a exercise we're looking where will the moon be from our perspective on the night of the second day of the month of Iyar of that year of Dalet Taf Taf Kuf Lamed Ches it's going to be b'mazal shor b'shmoneh esrei mailos v'shishim u'shloshah chalakim. mima'alah hatshiis simanam Mem Ches Lamed Gimel.

V'al derech zeh teida makom hayareach ha'amiti b'chol eis shetirtzeh mitchilas shana zu shehi ikar ad sof ha'olam. And we will continue in a moment. Okay, now we're going to start chapter 16. So, in chapter 16, the Rambam will tell us the that uh not like the sun, that the sun always traveling under the kav hamazalos.

That's kav hamazalos over here, and the sun will always be under some place under the black line, which is kav hamazalos. So it could be in the darom in of the world, it can be uh north on the on the north. But it's always it will always be under kav hamazalos. Now the Rambam tells us but the moon is not like this.

The moon can be sometimes also under kav hamazalos, but mostly, most of the time, the moon will be on the side of the mazalos. It could be either on the south side or it could be on the north side. And and just so you know. Okay, I'm sorry sorry I got it I got it I got it I got it.

Okay. How about now? Good. weiter Vaiter. Oh you see? Yeah yes yes yes.

Okay. So the Rambam calls in general the Rambam calls calls the when the moon is let's say in the in the south side of the mazalos the Rambam says the moon has a rochav dromi. A a width whatever you call it in English. Uh width on the south or it has a rochav tzfoni.

Now what what what makes uh what makes the the moon to go on the south on the or on the north? So we said already before that the moon has actually three big galgalim which goes around the world and one of them is noteh. Noteh means that it's off the mazalos to to one side or the other. The blue one is what we call the galgal noteh and the red one is what we call before doimim which because his his his equator his direction is under the kav hamazalos. Now when we have the blue one that means that the equator of the each each like we said before each galgal is actually a whole sphere.

I put a little strip over here but this this uh blue one is actually a whole sphere that goes around which goes around uh actually that's the first sphere from from the earth. But the the the line over here is the equator or the direction of that sphere which the and the moon the small moon will be in that uh in the green which is in the blue what we see over here. Now, the so so we see over here that the that the moon when it uh crosses over from here let's say that's that's uh south that's uh north. Now the moon we said goes from west right? From west to east.

So the moon will always travel this way. So now here when the when the moon crosses from uh from the north side of the of the of the mazalos and goes over to the south side, so the Rambam says this place it called is called zanav. And there's two zanav the snake. No and one is rosh.

And and after 180 degrees that the moon went went went and then it it came to the place to the junction where it crosses from the from the south to the north here's the Rambam calls zanav rosh. And and how much will it go? So we said it will go it will go all the way all the way the maximum 90 degrees from the rosh after 90 degrees it will be 5 degrees away from the from the kav hamazalos which is the maximum that it can go to the north or goes. Now where is the junction? Where is the rosh? Where is the zanav? So the Rambam says the rosh and the zanav are actually moving. What means they are moving? Who's makes them move? The makes them move is the red the red one which is called noteh.

He's going under the kav hamazalos exactly his equator and when he moves like you see over here he moves and he's connected over here both galgalim so he schleps the the blue one. So in other words the junction here the junction is by uh by Nissan by Taleh. And once it moves slowly it it it and it goes backwards. It doesn't go from Taleh to to Shor it goes from Taleh to Dagim.

In other words from Nissan to to Adar and to Shvat and that's how it goes uh it it turns the rosh and the zanav. And Rambam calls it achoranim because he's going up the opposite of the sun. It's going the opposite direction of the sun. Not of the sun the opposite direction of our mind because our mind goes Nissan Iyar Sivan Right.

Now so okay so we know already that uh so we know already that the moon is sometimes in the in the north and the south and also we know that the north and south are actually uh moving. It's not a stationary place where it crosses because the red is moving and the red is schlepping the blue with it. Right. Now one more thing the Rambam will tell us uh if we want to find out the makom amiti from the rosh hazanav.

Oh why does he say that? Because like I said before our head works that we go from from mizrach we go from Taleh to to to Shor and go to T'omim and go سرطان Sartan. So on here it goes the opposite. So let's say like this the rosh was in zanav right? The rosh was in zanav and let's say it went 185 degrees. Went 185 degrees.

So in our head automatically forward So it went forward so where is it now? In 5 of Moznayim. But it's not so. Or but because it went the opposite so it went five into Besulah. In other words it went five into the into it went the whole winter light the whole uh the whole uh south and then went to the end of the summer And it went into a little into into the north.

Yeah. So the Rambam will tell us how to adjust it. Okay now let me inside. Agula shesovev ba yareach tamid noteh al agula shesovevet ba shemesh tamid chetzyah noteh latzafon v'chetzyah noteh ladarom u'shtei nekudos like we said the two junctions yesh bah zu k'neged zu shebahem chotkos shtei ha'agulos zu b'zu lefichach k'shehayareach b'achat misheneihem nimtza sovev b'agulas hashemesh k'neged hashemesh b'shaveh.

In other words when the sun when the moon will be in the junction right in the junction the junction from the red and and so then then let's say if the molad will happen to be in that place so that means then we'll have an eclipse. That's the eclipse. That's the eclipse of the sun because both are on the mazalos. On the mazalos.

Okay. Now if the if the if if if in so only two places in the world that can have eclipse either by the rosh or by the zanav. The rest will be maybe a partial eclipse but not a full eclipse. Okay.

V'hanekudah shemimena tatchil hayareach lintos latzafon k'shehashemesh hi nikras rosh. V'hanekudah shemimena yatchil hayareach lintos ladarom k'shehashemesh hi nikras zanav. U'ma'alas harosh hazu ein lah lo yetzivus v'lo gvul and that's the speed actually of the red galgal or the red sphere that I showed you. V'hu holech b'mazalos achoranim mi'taleh l'dagim u'lidli v'chen sovev tamid.

from Dli to Gdi. Yeah. how much does he go every day? Ma'alas harosh ha'emtzoi b'yom echad shlosha chalakim v'achat esrei shniyos. It comes out about 20 roughly 20 in 20 years the red galgal the red sphere goes all around the whole the whole mazalos.

Okay. Nimtza mahalocho b'shevuah yamim chamesh mailos v'shiv'ah asar chalakim u'shloshim v'arbaim shniyos siman Hey Yud Zayin Lamed Dalet. V'nimtza mahalocho b'elef yom shtei shtayim v'chamishim mailos chamishim u'shloshah chalakim v'eser shniyos siman Nun Beis Nun Gimel Yud. V'nimtza shiyurei mahalocho ba'aseres alafim yom meah v'tishim v'shesh mailos v'arbaim u'shloshah chalakim v'arbaim v'shesh shniyos siman Kuf Tzadi Vov Mem Gimel Mem Vov.

V'nimtza mahalocho l'tish'ah asar yom ma'alah achat shnaim chalakim u'shnaim u'shloshim chalakim v'tesha shniyos siman Aleph Beis Lamed Beis Tet. V'nimtza mahalocho l'shana hazu shmoneh esrei mailos It comes out shmoneh esrei shmoneh esrei if you make 18 times uh 18 times 20 is 360. 360. Oh 18 times 20 is 360.

Okay okay very good. shmoneh esrei mailos v'arbaim v'chalakim u'shtayim v'arbaim shniyos siman Yud Ches Mem Mem Beis. Okay. Nimtza hamaloch b'shivim yom Nimtza mahalocho l'shana zu U'v'maloch b'shlosh meos nasun maloch u'v'yom echad v'chen tamid.

Nimtzaisa lamed. Yeah. And now he's going to give us an example. Dugma.

Emtza harosh b'tchilas leil chamishi shehu ha'ikar haya meah shmonim mailos v'sheva v'chamishim chalakim u'shmoneh esrei shniyos siman Kuf Pei Nun Zayin Yud Ches. Now why the Rambam said here called emtza harosh? Why he calls it emtza harosh? Because he goes he counts it from Taleh to Shor he counted the regular way the way we are used to. So it came out that it was it almost just passed the meah shmonim. It just passed the it just passed to uh Tishrei went into.

Okay. Now if you want to know really where it is not makom emtzoi im tirtzeh leida makom harosh b'chodesh tirtzeh tosif maloch l'osan hayamim al emtza harosh shel ha'ikar k'derech shetosif emtza hashemesh v'emtza hayareach. v'tigra ha'emtza mishlosh meos v'shishim mailos v'hanishar hi makom harosh b'osah eis u'ch'derech hadugma lo l'makom hazanav. That's okay that's what you make the from our perspective where the rosh is and where the zanav is.

in in in actuality by us by us for us. Amit. Keitzad harei sheratzinu oh wait let me see again. im tirtzeh leida makom harosh b'chodesh tirtzeh tosif emtzoi l'osah eis k'derech shetosif emtza hashemesh v'emtza hayareach v'tigra min ha'emtza mishlosh meos v'shishim.

Oh why happens if you're going to minus the numbers that we had? We had uh we had before 180 uh 180 let's say 181 okay? If we had 181 minus minus uh okay minus 360 so we're gonna get 179. In the other yeah. Oh so 179 means that uh means that you're going to get to uh oh it didn't cost to the it's still gonna be before uh one one less. the adjustment is to go in the right direction put it in the right direction.

Right. Okay. Um Yeah. Keitzad harei sheratzinu leida makom harosh l'tchilas leil erev Shabbos sheyom sheini l'chodesh Iyar mishanah zu shehi shnas ha'ikar.

U'minyan hayamim hagmurim mitchilas leil ha'ikar ad leil zeh she'anu rotzim leida makom harosh bo tesha v'esrim yom. Tosif maloch l'tesha v'esrim yom al ha'ikar shehi meah shmonim mailos v'sheva v'chamishim chalakim u'shmoneh esrei shniyos. Yetzei lecha emtza harosh shtayim u'shloshim chalakim v'sheva v'arbaim shniyos. Tigra ha'emtza hazeh mishlosh meos v'shishim v'nishar shlosh meos v'chamishim v'tisha mailos v'sheva v'esrim chalakim u'shlosh esrei shniyos.

V'zehu makom harosh. V'al haderech zeh tamid.