Jewish audio on Chabad.org.All right, Chevra, good morning with the help of Hashem we are learning today's three prakim in Rambam which is Hilchos Kiddush Hachodesh and prakim Yud Beis, Yud Gimmel, and Yud Daled. A big Yasher Koach from myself, from Chabad Tzolah, from Chabad.org to my dear teacher that I love Mamash Ahavah Beta'anugim to Rebben, Rabbi Yosef Losh who forever is my teacher. Not only in the dinim of Kiddush Hachodesh of what a Yid means to learn b'simcha and to teach what you know. So I have the merit to be in their house in Crown Heights, Kan tziva Hashem hamevorach.

So I have the opportunity to use his famous props that the that the that we are learning for 40 years to understand these dinim. And I'll be as kitzer dik, as quick as I could be, and here on the video, there's the advantage of pausing, of going back. And the biggest Yasher Koach is I have my teacher with me, which is very important. So if I say something that's wrong, he's going to correct me.

So like God, you can't see, but some people hear, if you hear a voice, that's my teacher. All right. Now, introduction number one. Introduction number one is is that we place the world in the center of everything.

B'ruchnius avada, because the purpose of creation is for us, is for Yidden to keep the mitzvos. And since that's the kavanah, it's not just b'ruchnius, but we actually placed this earth in the center of everything that's out there. And then we are going to put around the earth something that we will call a galgal. A galgal is transparent.

A galgal is not an orbit. A galgal is very much like this prop, as you see, there is a ball that goes all the way around the earth, 360 degrees. That is what we refer to to our galgal. At some point in the atmosphere, when you go up, you are exiting the Eretz and you're going into the galgal of the levanah.

There is no space in between the earth and the galgal number one, no space between galgal number two to galgal number three. We in the Torah will first categorize seven galgalim in which we have the Shivah Kochvei Leches, which are the seven seven moving planets. We're not going to speak about all seven, not nogea, we are going to be speaking exclusively first about the sun and then about the moon. The moon is going to be in the first galgal relative to the earth.

The sun is going to be in the fourth galgal relative to the earth. And after you have the seventh galgal, which is Saturn, which is Shabsai, then you have a tremendous amount of space, but since for our learning, it's not nogea, we're going to call everything else the eighth galgal. The eighth galgal is infinitely longer, bigger, deeper than all of the seven. But it's the seven and the eighth.

Now, when we are standing on the earth and we will look up, since the galgalim are transparent, whether the whether there's the levanah, which is in the closest galgal around the earth, whether you're looking at a star that's all the way far away in the eighth galgal, the sizes will appear different, but they're all going to look together. It's going to be like a painting because the galgalim are transparent. Now, what's gevaldik is chap this idea. Outside the eighth galgal, whether you call that makom, whether you don't call that makom, we're going to say that outside the eighth galgal you have what's out there.

What is out there is what we refer to either as the Galgal HaTshii or as the Galgal HaYomi. Step number one, this is very important. The imagery that the Oibershter allows us to see from all of the eight galgalim, which is the eighth galgal and all the Shivah Kochvei Leches, all of that is look has an appearance to us, project that out into the ninth galgal. There's nothing in the ninth galgal.

But whenever we're going to be speaking about the ninth galgal or the Galgal HaYomi, it's our minds projection of everything that's in here to out there. And that is what we are referring to when we speak about the mazalos. The mazalos are the constellations. What do we mean by the mazalos? That there is a certain image, maybe not now as that Rambam writes in the times of the Mabul, it's not nogea, that when you look at the main belt of the stars, as all of them together are projected in the ninth galgal, they form certain imageries.

And the names that we give beginning with Taleh is what at some point in history, the sum total of the stars appear to us to look like a Taleh. Now, every sphere, right, every sphere is divided into 360 degrees. The space, the distance between one degree and the other varies. It can be very little and it can be billions of miles.

Because the bigger the sphere, the more distance you have to travel to go all the way around. And always remember that there's a big difference between a maalah and between distance. There's shetach and a maalah. Shetach is distance.

A Maalah means a degree. How much distance is there between every degree and the other? It depends. But every galgal will only have 360 degrees. And whenever you hit 361, to simplify things, you never say 361, you say number one.

Because once you go back to the beginning, then you begin all anew. The earth has an equator. What's pshat in an equator? That when something, the center, the center of the earth that we refer to is the center between north and south. Now, we have over here Rabbi Losh's globe.

And from where I'm standing, we're going to place mizrach what's in front of me, maariv is what's behind me, which means north will be to my left, and south will be to my right. Hashem made the world in a way that the Galgal HaTshii, which is the Galgal HaYomi, which is moving and it's shlepping with it all of the inner galgalim is moving, I'm giving approximate numbers, 361 degrees every 24 hours. Not 360, 361, it's not exact, but it's approximate. So which means the earth is not moving, the earth is stationary.

All of the galgalim, every single one, even though we're going to add something very important, everyone is being moved by the ninth galgal. The ninth galgal is in Yiddish shlepping, carrying, moving everything with it, and it's moving from east to west, from mizrach to maariv, be'erech 361 degrees every 24 hours. Now, the gevaldik, the beauty here is like this. Even though the ninth galgal is affecting all of the inner galgalim, but they're not stuck together in a way where each galgal only has that movement.

In addition to the movement of the Galgal HaYomi, every single galgal has its own movement. The truth is that many of the galgalim have really have many mini galgalim in them, as we'll see. We'll speak about the sun, we'll speak about the moon. But before we get into the breakdown into the details, the bigger picture that every galgal has its own movement, and it's actually in many of them, they are moving in the opposite direction of the Galgal HaYomi.

So let's speak about the galgal of the sun. The the galgal of the sun onto which, into which is the sun affixed. You have to just have this image. What's moving the sun? The sun is not moving.

The galgal of the sun is moving the sun. The sun is in the galgal of the sun. The galgal again doesn't mean an orbit. It doesn't mean a circle, doesn't mean a track.

It means a 360 transparent metzius that is that is an existence, even though it's not physical, and the Rambam says it has intelligence, however you'll understand that. The galgal of the sun is moving, I'm giving approximate numbers, one degree a day. As we'll see in the beginning of chapter 12, it's not one degree. It's we'll see from one way of looking at it, it's 59 degrees plus a little bit.

But be'erech one degree. So now understand, 59 chalakim. 59, a little bit less than one degree. 59 Chalokim v'shmoneh shniyos.

That's thank you Rabbi Losh. So let me say like this. If everything is moving 361, which means the galgal of the sun, aside of the fact that it has its own movement, it's going 361. B'noisaf al zeh, it's going backwards, it's going the opposite direction from maariv to mizrach 59 chalakim or around one degree.

Now, parenthetically, as we should know by now, that the 360 degrees in the holy tongue is going to be called maalos. Every degree is broken down into chalakim. Every degree has 60 chalakim. Every chelek is further broken down into shniyos, which which which 60, 60 making up then each one times 360.

As the Rambam says, these numbers were chosen because all of the mathematical calculations that we need to make becomes facilitated if we begin with the 360 or with the 60. This is something that has to be understood properly. Even though the Rambam doesn't write it, but I would say that the biggest teaching that we all benefit from Rabbi Losh is that this has to be properly understood to really be able to get all the rest. Now, the galgal of the sun.

The galgal of the sun is comprised of two galgalim. Before we go there, one more, one more introduction before the galgal of the sun. The Galgal HaYomi, as you see over here, is moving from from from east to west 361, 361. So let me speak again about the equator.

The equator is the line that's in between north and south. Let's move the equator all the way up to the Galgal HaYomi. This is going to be the line over here, whoever is watching the video on the globe, this is the equator of the Galgal HaYomi, which is bediyuk on top of the equator of the earth. The stars that we are projecting in the Galgal HaTshii also has a center, but it's not the same center.

It's not the same center. You have to be able to see it. When you see it, it's easy. What I mean is, is that if you can look at the globe, you see the black line of the mazalos.

That's the equator of the, that's the center of the mazalos. And let me explain why this is so important to understand. The sun is really only traveling around one degree a day relative to the mazalos. The sun is traveling for me, for you, on this olam hazeh hagashmi, every 24 hours it's going 360.

I know that. Because when you combine both movements together, you add, you subtract, 360. But if you take us out for a moment, that's the biggest avodah is to take the self out. So let's just think about how the sun looks vis-a-vis the mazalos.

If you would be living in the mazalos, where is the sun on you? We said the sun is traveling around one degree every day from west to east. We're going to begin the year with the month of Nissan, which is also going to be referred to as the tkufah of spring. The Nissan, the formation of the mazal for the next 30 degrees is going to be mazal Taleh. We have 12 mazalos.

Every mazal for you to have totaling 360, right? So what do you have? 360 divided by 12 is 30. Which means every mazal occupies 30 maalos in the Galgal HaTshii or in any other area, 30 maalos. When we are saying that the sun is traveling around one maalah every day, that means that it will take 30 days for the sun to enter the next mazal. The tkufah of of of spring/summer begins when the sun is in the beginning of mazal Taleh.

Now, since the equator of the of the mazalos are not the same equator of the earth. You have to see this. And guys, Chevra, we'll review this. We're going to learn this Shavuos night.

So don't worry. And if you're watching the video, watch it again. What's really happening is, is that the sun that's traveling under under the center of the mazalos, not over the equator, it's going to be moving as you go from the from spring into summer, it's going to be moving north and north and north away from the equator. The total amount of of of maalos off the equator max that the sun will reach, either in the north in the summer or in the south in the winter is around 23 and a half degrees.

This explains why it's hotter summer in the northern hemisphere, why it's hotter in the summer in the southern hemisphere, but that's not the focus of what we're learning out right now. Having said all this, now we are ready to move on to the galgal of the sun. We said the galgal of the sun is the fourth galgal, doesn't matter what number it is. And let me explain the final bigger intro to understand what we are getting at.

What are we getting at? Why are we learning all this? First of all, it's Torah. Second of all, the Rebbe told us to learn the Rambam. But we're learning all this ultimately to know when will we see the molad. The word molad means giving birth, giving birth to what? So this is what's happening.

Since the moon has no light of its own, at least not until Moshiach is coming. What's going to happen then, we'll find out what it means. We say by Kiddush Levanah that it's going to go back to the way it used to be. The the moon is only reflecting the light of the sun.

So it's poshut to understand that for me to see the reflection from the sun off the moon, I have to be seeing the part of the moon that's seeing the sun. What do I mean by that? So if you are standing over here in this beautiful prop, you're standing on the earth. You're and you're looking up. The moon is going to be in the first galgal.

The sun is going to be on the galgal above it. If the sun and the moon are going to be exactly one over the other, you are under the moon, you are not seeing any part of the moon that's seeing the sun. Yeah, the moon is reflecting the light back, but not to you, not to me, back to the sun. Only when the moon is off, it goes away from the sun.

It's traveling, as we'll see, as we mentioned, be'erech, if the sun is traveling around one degree a day, the moon is traveling around 13 degrees, but don't forget, it's only 12 degrees apart, only 12 degrees apart because the sun is also moving one. So that's again, around, very approximate, 12 degrees away from each other every day, in around 30 days, you're back to square zero, back to square one, back to ground zero. Sun, moon, I'm on the bottom, when they are aligned, I'll see nothing. Since the moon is going faster than the sun around 12 degrees, it's going 13, but it's going faster than the sun around 12.

So every day, you see it's 12 degrees. Two days, 24 degrees. And as it goes away from the sun, there is more of the moon that's facing the sun that will be facing us as well. What's the full moon? The full moon means is that the moon is now under the earth.

Of course, not exactly aligned. That will be a lunar eclipse, but not exactly. And we'll see how difficult it is to be exact. If it's off by a hair breath, from that distance, it's completely off, then we're going to see all of the moon that's seeing the sun.

Now, guys, another thing. The sun is traveling from from west to east. I know it sounds very funny. You get used to it.

The moon is traveling from west to east, from west to east. So let me ask you guys a question, Yakir Dehal Kop, when when the when the sun and the moon became aligned. And now to see the new moon, who will be ahead of whom? Who is going to be more west than whom? The sun is going to be more west than the moon. It means in the beginning of the month, we are we are watching everything move from east to west.

That's the funny part of it. But really, the sun and the moon are going in the opposite direction. If the moon is running quicker than the sun, if it's moving quicker than the sun, and they're going to east, that means the new moon is when the moon went east of the sun. Now, when you have sunset, where does the sun set? In the west, in the western horizon.

When will it be possible to see the new moon? It's not only is that right after sunset, right? You have in the beginning lesser degrees. As time goes on, you have more and more degrees. Sunset, immediate moon set, you'll see nothing. The more time you have in between sunset and moon set, the more is the chance that you'll be able to see the moon.

And indeed, in the beginning of the month, it will always be the same thing. You will always notice that the molad will only be seen in the western horizon, and very close to the horizon. If you're seeing it, if the moon is setting a few days, a few hours after the sun set, you're not in the beginning of the month. And in the middle of the month, be'erech, mamash bediyuk, the moment the sun, it's going to be on opposite sides.

When the when the sun is going to set, then from the eastern horizon, the moon is going to rise. Okay. Having said all that, now with the mechila of my teacher, he's going to mamash help me with the ikar, which is the Torah. And now with a couple of pictures that are needed to better understand the intro to this to the 12th chapter.

This was an intro to the whole concept. Oh, now guys, listen. We're looking for the molad. Molad means when, let's go, when is the moon under the sun? And obviously a short amount of time afterwards, as we explained, since the moon is running quicker than the sun, we will be able to see the moon.

The goal of this is to know when the molad will be able to be visible. Of course, if there's clouds, you won't see it. Of course, every part of the world has a different molad. Of course.

We're speaking about the Eretz Yisrael, the Holy Land. And there is when you know the cheshbon of how the sun is moving, how quick, and where will it appear to you when you're standing on the earth. When you're going to then know how quick the moon is moving, where will it appear to you, to me, when we're standing over here. When we put that together, then we will know how to come to the molad.

When we speak about where is the sun. We begin with where is the sun vis-a-vis the mazalos, as we said in the beginning. You have the projection on the ninth galgal, and the sun is moving relative to the mazalos around one degree a day from west to east. But that's not enough to know where the sun is.

There are many other facts that you have to know to be able to appreciate what you need to know where the sun is. So step number one. Step number one is is the galgal of the sun itself is comprised of two galgalim. It's not one galgal.

And here is the picture that I'm going to try to use the zoom over here. This is very important. And Rabbi Losh is going to somehow get this over here. I hope you can see this.

The blue is the galgal of the sun. Just pick up the whole thing, pick up the whole thing. That's it. Inside the blue, there's the red, which is a galgal inside the galgal.

There are two things that's happening here. Number one, this movement, the speed of the red and the blue are not the same. They are both moving in the same direction, but it's not the same. When we're going to say, as we mentioned, that the galgal of the sun is moving approximately one degree a day, that's the sum total of both of these galgalim.

But for the cheshbonos that we'll need to make in this chapter, you'll have to separate the movement of the blue and the movement of the red. Number two, the red is not in the center of the blue. The red is not in the center of the blue. The galgalim have the earth in the center.

The galgal of the sun considered to be one unit or two separate units? It's amazing miracle, it's a paradox. Every galgal is its own unit, but the movement of the ninth galgal is affecting all of the galgalim. The movement of the ninth galgal is affecting the galgal of the sun. Even though all of the galgalim above it, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, and the eighth have different movements.

So they are connected, but they remain independent. But the affects the red. Oh. Now, coming over here.

In these two galgalim, the movement of the blue affects the movement of the red. The blue is moving very slow. We'll see the numbers inside. The red is moving, when we speak about around the one degree, most of that movement is the red.

But you have to know the sum total to get the right number. Now, why is this important? The earth is in the center of the blue. The earth is not in the center of the red. The red has a different center.

Number two, the red is the red, the height. If the height, we're going to make this north where I'm pointing with my finger. All right? The sun is in the middle of the red. When the sun is in the middle of the red in this part, when the red is here in the blue, it's very it's higher from the earth.

The Govah Hashemesh is higher from the earth than when the sun is going to be in this part of the red, where it's going to be much closer to the earth. The center of the red is not the center of the blue. The center of the red affects the Govah Hashemesh. Now, why do I care that the sun sometimes de facto will be much higher away from the earth, much, and sometimes much closer? That's not that much connected to summer, winter at all.

Ironically, you can have the sun the farthest away in the height, and it can be summer. It's not a contradiction at all. It has a very little effect on the heat, but it will affect the following. Now, guys, get familiar with the words.

I'm going to sit down, and then we'll come back, we're going to come back to this in a moment. Now Rabbi Lesh, if you can put this back down and make a There we go. Is the white in the back? Yeah. You want to drey it maybe? Okay.

Now, here here's the following. Get familiar with this. You have when we're asking, where is the sun? Where is the sun vis-a-vis the mazalos? And you're going to give an answer. Well, it's in the first degree of mazal Taleh.

That answer is very tricky. Why is it very tricky? Because since, as we showed in the picture, the center of the red, which is the center of where the sun is, is north sometimes. We're going to always speak about when it is north, even though this is changing the whole time. But when it is in the north of the blue, it's going to be up to two degrees further north than the center of the earth.

Where the sun is going to be placed vis-a-vis itself, forget about the earth in its center. So the sun is the first degree in mazal Taleh. That will not be how it appears when we're standing on planet Earth. So first we're going to have to learn where the sun is vis-a-vis its own movement.

But then we're going to have to translate that how does that look for us? And it's not going to be in the same location. Mashal l'mah hadavar domeh. If you can just if you can review rewind this and look at the picture of the red over here. If I'm standing over here, you can see this, and the sun is over here.

Just think about it. I'm I'm looking up. Can you guys see this? And the sun will be over here. I'm going to be looking up to my left to see it.

I have to look up to the left. If I would be standing in the center of the sun, I would not look up at all. I would look straight. And don't forget, Chevra, that this is where the mazalos are in the ninth galgal.

So it's amazing. So from the think about it, if the sun is here, where is it in the mazalos? If I'm looking at it from this angle, I'm going to see it here. If I'm looking at it from this angle, to me it will appear it's in a whole different place. Not very far away, but two degrees will make a huge difference when it comes to our goal, which is ultimately to know when the molad is going to be.

The molad is only after the moon went away a little bit from the sun. You have to know where the sun is first concerning itself. You have to know where the moon is concerning itself. And then you're going to have to know how does it look to us.

Whenever we speak about the sun's location vis-a-vis itself, we're going to be calling that the Mahalach Ha'emtzo'i. Whenever we're going to be speaking about where does the sun appear for us, that's called the Mahalach Ha'amiti. The cheshbon of the molad has to be based on the Mahalach Ha'amiti. But in order for you to know where it is in the Mahalach Ha'amiti, first you have to know where it is vis-a-vis the sun by itself.

Can the sun and the earth don't have the same center? Because of that, you have to first speak about the sun. Now, where is the center of the sun? Well, it depends where the height of the red is. And it doesn't always remain in the same location. And as we'll see the numbers in a moment.

So you have to establish first where is the height of the sun to understand the difference between where the sun appears in the mazalos to if you would have been in the center of the sun, and then you have to know how to bring it down to to how it looks for us or how it looks for us. Rabbi Losh has a very good mashal. The sun speaks one language. Think about it.

You have a person speaking speaking Lashon Kodesh speaking English. The moon is speaking Portuguese, a different language. They can't communicate to each other. So what do you need to do? You have to translate the language of the sun to the holy tongue, Lashon Kodesh.

Then you have to take the language of the moon and translate it into the holy tongue. And now you can combine one, you can communicate one to the other. This is a foundational concept that you have to understand before you learn this chapter. The Govah Hashemesh being that it's not equal always around the earth is extremely important.

And you have to know now two steps, where is it concerning the emtzo'i, which means where is the sun if I would have been in the center of the red. And then I'll have to figure out how do I translate that? How does the sun look to me vis-a-vis the mazalos if I'm standing on planet Earth and we're calling that the amiti. The Emes is there's no Emes. In other words, it's all relative.

But on the other hand, the Emes is a Yid keeping the mitzvos. So the cheshbon that the Torah needs from me, that's the Emes. Because that is what counts. The earth is in the center.

It's ironic that the Emes is not the sun, how the sun sees itself. The sun sees itself is a sheker. It's like the way we see ourselves. That's not the Emes.

There's a deeper Emes, the way the Oibershter sees us, the way Yiddishkeit, the way the Torah sees us. That's the Emes. Okay. Now, final introduction, which is really very big.

The sun is traveling every day, we mentioned around one degree. These numbers are very approximate. If you were to translate that in miles, the sun is traveling every day around a million and a half miles, but every day exactly the same number of miles, exactly the same number of miles. Does that mean that it's traveling from your perspective the same amount of degrees every day? What do you guys think? If the sun is traveling every day the same number of miles, does that mean that it's therefore covering the same Shetach? The answer is no.

No, not necessarily. Davka not. This is also connected to the fact that there is a Goivah Hashemesh. Whenever, when if there would be no Goivah Hashemesh, it would be traveling exactly the same amount of degrees.

But since the Goivah Hashemesh varies, sometimes the sun is higher up, so to say, vis-a-vis the Earth, which is not on the scent. Sometimes the sun is closer vis-a-vis the Earth, Even though it's traveling the same number of miles, it's gonna cover a different amount. If it's farther away, if it's farther away, then the same million and a half miles is gonna cover less ground. Less.

Not ground. Less degrees. Less Shetach. Less less degrees, less degrees.

Not less Shetach, not less ground, less degrees. Very good. Good thank you. And if the the the the the sun again, which is not around the world.

The world is off-center from the sun, from the red picture that we have, if it's closer, the same amount of miles, which is Shetach, will cover many, many more degrees. And again, you have to know what degree is the sun in the Mazalos first in vis-a-vis the sun itself, the Emtzoi, then Cheshboning, how do you translate that in the Amiti to really know where the sun is. So today from the three chapters, the 12th and the 13th chapter, we spoke out by heart. Mamish.

And that's going to help us know how to find the place Amiti of the sun by going through first the Emtzoi and the Amiti and the Goivah Hashemesh, and all of the numbers that the Rambam makes the Cheshboines easy for us to do. And then we'll give another shorter introduction before we learn today's third chapter, which is the 14th chapter, which will begin speaking about the moon, which is much more complicated than the sun. You know, men are like the sun and women are like the moon, who's more complicated? That all comes from over here. Okay, so Perek Shneim Asar has has a total of, I think only two Halachos.

And let us start with Halacha Alef. Yeah, Zogt der Rambam. Okay, Rabbi Rabbi Ma'ayan Begayer, just whoever's jumping in right now, really on behalf of all of us, a big thank you. Halacha Alef.

Mahalach Hashemesh Ha'emtzoi Beyom Echad. The the the distance of what the sun is covering vis-a-vis the Mazalos. And Emtzoi means as it is as it sees itself. As it sees itself, here for the zoom.

As it sees itself means, Opa. Here are the Mazalos. The black is the Mazalos. We are here on the black, but since the sun, where the sun is in the red Galgal inside the blue Galgal.

The center of the red is not the center of the Earth. So you have to first make believe that you're living here, which we're not. And as the sun is moving, if I'm looking at the sun and I want to give it an address at the Mazalos, where is it by the Mazalos? And then I'll have to learn how to bring it down to where it looks like to me, which is what we're going to call the Amiti. The Amiti is what it looks like to me and the Emtzoi is how it sees itself in the center of the of the sun itself.

Mahalach Hashemesh Ha'amiti Bechol Yom, Emtzoi Bechol Yom... Emtzoi Bechol Yom. And every day is comprised of 24 hours. That's very important as we'll see in a moment.

Not before Shkiah, after Shkiah. No, because Shkiah changes every day. Tisha Vachamishim Chalakim. 59 Chalakim.

We mentioned that every Maila is divided into 60. So it's actually a little bit less than one degree, plus eight. And the Siman is Nun Tes Ches. Nimtza Mahalcho.

Now I want you to know that the Nun Tes Ches is not the movement of the red, and it's not the movement of only the blue. It's the movement of both of them together. When you combine their movement, it's going to be Nun Tes Ches. Why is it so important to chap the red and the blue? And I said in the beginning that the blue has a different speed than the red, because the Goivah Hashemesh, the Goivah Hashemesh, the Goivah Hashemesh which is always going to be over here, which is always going to be, that's you see that's the place, that's the furthest away from the earth.

The furthest away is here. The blue is moving. So is the Goivah Hashemesh on Sartan, or is it in the north? Or is Goivah in the south? Well, it's going to constantly be changing even though it's changing very slowly. So the movement of the blue, the red the Goivah Hashemesh is always here on the blue, but where is the blue? So as the blue is moving, it's going to be accordingly in that direction.

Alright. Mahalach Hashemesh Bechol Yom is we said Nun Tes Ches. Nimtza Mahalcho Ba'asara Yamim, every 10 days, it's going to cover Tesha Mailos Ve'echad Vachamishim Chalakim V'shalosh V'esrim Shniyos. And V'simanam Tuna Chag.

V'nimtza Mahalcho Beme'ah Yom Shmoneh V'tish'im Mailos Ushloshim Ushlosha Chalakim Ushloshim V'chamesh Shniyos. Simanam Tzach Lag Lah. Ushe'eris Mahalcho B'elef Yom Achar Shetichlos Kol Shlosh Me'os Veshishim Mailos Kmo Shebe'arnu we already mentioned in our intro, that the moment you hit 360 degrees, you don't say when you make these calculations 361. You're back to one, you're back to the beginning.

It's going to be a total of Masayim Vechamesh Veshishim Mailos Ushmonim Ushlosha Chalakim Vachamishim Shniyos. Simanam Rasah Lachak. V'nimtza She'eris Mahalcho Ba'aseres Alafim Yom is going to be Me'ah Veshesh Ushloshim Mailos Ushmonim V'esrim Chalakim V'esrim Shniyos. Simanam Kuf Lamed Vav, Chachag.

V'al Derech Zu Sichpol V'sotzi Mahalcho Lechol Minyan Shetirzeh V'chein Im Tirzeh La'asos Simanim Yeduim Etzlecha Lemahalcho only for two days, small amounts of time. V'lishlosha V'le'arba'ah Ad Asarah Ta'aseh. V'chein Im Tirzeh La'asos Lecha Simanim Yeduim Muchanim Lemahalcho Le'esrim Yom O Lishloshim O Le'arba'im Yom Ad Me'ah Ta'aseh. V'davar Galui Hu Veyadua Achar Sheyadato Mahalcho Leyom Echad.

As long as you know the exact movement every day. Movement means where is the sun vis-a-vis the Mazalos. Where is the sun vis-a-vis me? Every 24 hours it moved the whole thing. I know that.

Not vis-a-vis me. Where is the sun relative to the Mazalos? Relative to the Mazal Taleh? There you go. Now, V'rauy Lihiyosam Smuchim Viyeduim Etzlecha Mahalach Emtza Hashemesh Letisha V'esrim Yom. Or Lishloshim which is a which is a which is around a month.

And also Ulishlosh Me'os Arba'im Vachamisha Yom. Why are we giving that number? Because that's a year. That's that's a lunar year. Shehein Shnas Levanah Bizman Shechodsheha Kesidran which is also called Shanah Sedurah.

Shebizman Sheyihyu Eilu Hacheshbonos Sedurim Muchanim when you have these numbers easily ready for you, Yihiyeh Hacheshbon Kal Eilecha Ladaas Hayareiach. It's gonna help you count right away to know when the Molad is gonna be. Because everything that we're learning is to figure out when the Molad is going to be. Lefi Shetesha Esrei Yom Gemurim Mileil Re'iyah Ad Leil Re'iyah Shel Chodesh Haba.

V'chein Bechol Chodesh Vachodesh will never be less than 29 days and not more. As we'll see later, you can't see the moon by the Molad. You need at least six hours at least to see the moon. A solar a month is really 29 days and a half a day plus.

So that's why he's saying 29 days because you needed some hours bichlal for the moon to be visible. It's never going to be less than 29 days later. She'ein Cheftzeinu Bechol Hacheshbonos the reason why we are learning all of this astronomy is for the goal of knowing when will it be possible to see the Molad. Now, that's why the Rambam is not going to tell us the movements of all the other Kochvei Leches, which are very complex.

There are many parts of astronomy that the Rambam will leave out because the purpose of all of these Halachos is only to know when the Molad is. But for that you will have to by the sun, not know how quick is it moving, the Ikar because since we have a Goivah Hashemesh, that creates the challenge of it's not moving vis-a-vis the Mazalos, there isn't a absolute address. If you are in the center of the sun, there's one address. If you are in the center of the earth, there's another address.

And the only way you get to what it looks like to us is by knowing where it looks like to itself, and then knowing how to translate that into Lashon Hakodesh, which is to the Mahalach Ha'amiti. But you have to begin with the Mahalach Ha'emtzoi. V'chein Beleil Re'iyas Hachodesh Hahu Ad Leil Re'iyas Chodesh Shanah Haba'ah, during a Shanah Sedurah or Shanah Shel Yom Echad V'chein Bechol Shanah Veshanah. Again the Rambam is going to give you all the numbers.

Umahalach Hashemesh Shehu Ha'emtzoi Letisha V'esrim Yom Shmoneh V'esrim Mailos Vachamishim Ushlosha Chalakim Ushnia Achas. That's the real movement. It's amazing. Which is Kaf Ches Nun Gimel Alef.

Umahalcho Lishanah Sedurah Shlosh Me'os Arba'im Ushmoneh Mailos Vachamisha Vachamishim Chalakim Vachamesh Esrei Shniyos. Simanam Smach Nach Yam. Halacha Beis which is also the final Halacha of this chapter, says the Rambam, Nekudah Achas Yesh Begalgal Hashemesh V'chein Beshaar Galgalei Hashibuch. Halacha Alef was corresponding to which part of the introduction, Rabbi? Halacha Alef was we was was telling you, you have to know before we come to knowing where the sun is vis-a-vis the Mazalos from our perspective, you have to know where is the sun on the Mazalos vis-a-vis the center of the sun's perspective.

So the numbers of how much does it move every day, and like we mentioned in the introduction that since the Goivah Hashemesh is off center, how much does it move every day, as far as the Mahalach Ha'emtzoi is concerned, the same exact amount. But as far as the Mahalach Ha'amiti is concerned, there will not be the same amount of degrees because when it's the Goivah Hashemesh is further away from us, it's going to cover less degrees, and when it's closer, it's going to cover more degrees. Now, Halacha Beis. Nekudah Achas Yesh Begalgal Hashemesh V'chein Beshaar Galgalei Hashibuch Kochavim.

Uve'eis Sheyihiyeh Hakochav Bah Yihiyeh Gavo'ah Me'al Ha'aretz Kol Mah De'efshar. That's the Goivah Hashemesh. That's the red in the blue. Ve'osah Hanekudah Shebegalgal Hashemesh.

And if you're listening to it, Chevra, you have to go on Chabad.org to see these pictures that Rabbi Lash drew, and they're amazing. And they're already a bissl antiquated. They're a bissl they have they have some longevity on them. I think he painted them about 40 years ago, but they're still functioning.

With the scotch tape, mit aleh gute zachen. Yellow scotch tape. U'shaar Hakochavim Chutz Min Hayareach Zazah Mimekomah Beshaveh. The Rambam is speaking now about the movement of the blue, that it moves in around every 70 years only one degree.

The height, the height means the height means where the red where the red has the least blue on top and the most blue underneath it. Farshteist? That's called the Goivah. Now, the red is stuck, so to say, in the blue. But the beauty is, since the blue, which is also going from west to east, not the way it looks.

The blue is also going from west to east. It's moving, takeh very, very slowly, but it's moving. As it moves, it's moving the Goivah Hashemesh from it being let's say in the north, ultimately to it being in the south and keep on dreyen zich arum making the circles, making the Hakofos. Ah.

Just to know, one of the things that a Yid gets from learning this is to see the greatness of God and the koach of God. And the fact that the amount of distance that it's covering, because the amount of distance is regardless whether you are in the center of the Emtzoi, whether you're looking Da'amiti, is exactly every day the same. And what we know here is that people's koach, he gets stronger, that was before we were 30 or 40 or 50, 60, 70. And then your koach gets weaker.

There are fluctuations. To appreciate how every day is exactly the same, that's you see the power of the infinite. Rabbi Lash told me that the Tzemach Tzedek said, if you think about how the Galgal Hashi is affecting all of the Galgalim, it's also affecting the Galgal the the the Galgal of the sun. It's not directly touching the Galgal of the sun.

There are other Galgalim in between it. Those other Galgalim have complete other movements, complete different movements. And yet the koach of the Galgal Hashi is affecting equally all of what's in it. You see the koach mafli la'asos, you see that God is everywhere.

And therefore God's effect, you know like sovev, this is like a sovev because it's like a koach that goes around, that the koach hasovev is takeh equal everywhere. It's mamish bekatan uvagadol. It affects the the outermost, the the innermost, the farthest, the closest, all the same. It's unbelievable.

Okay, guys we just covered the first little shtickel in Halacha Beis. So we spoke about the blue, the the the the the outer galgal of the sun. The red is the inner galgal and that is what creates the Goivah Hashemesh. Goivah Mahalcho Ba'asara Yamim Shnia Achas Vachatzi Shnia Shehu Shloshim Ushlishiyos.

V'nimtza Mahalcho Beme'ah Yom Chamesh Esrei Shniyos Umahalcho B'elef Yom Shnei Chalakim Ushloshim Shniyos Umahalcho Ba'aseres Alafim Yom Chamisha V'esrim Chalakim. V'nimtza Mahalcho Letisha V'esrim Yom Arba Shniyos Umahalcho Bishanah Sedurah Shloshim Vachamesh Shniyos. Kvar Amarnu says the Rambam Sheha'ikar Shemimenu Taschil Hacheshbon Zeh. Now the Rambam is giving us something very practical.

Again we're asking, when will the Molad be? Okay. Where is the sun? Where is the moon? We're focusing on the sun. I'll give you a simple thing. If I want to know where the sun is today, give me one objective date.

The Rambam gave a date of his lifetime, mistama when he was writing these Halachos. Give a date, say that on this date the sun was exactly in that location in the Mazalos. And now, when the Rambam is is writing a big part of these chapters, how much to add every 10 days, how much to add every 20 days, etcetera, etcetera, you have a beginning point. This is the Rambam's beginning point.

The beginning point is Mischilas Leil Chamishi Sheyomo Shlishi Lechodesh Nissan Mishnas Arba'as Alafim V'tsha Me'os Ushmoneh Ushloshim Liyetzirah. Umekom Hashemesh Bemahalcha Ha'emtzoi Hayah Ba'ikar Hazeh wasn't exactly north. At this date of the beginning point, the highest part of the sun, the top of the red, was Besheva Mailos Ushlosha Chalakim Ushnayim Ushloshim Shniyos Mimazal Te'omim. Simanam Zag Lag.

So which means that when you lived around in the times of the Rambam, I'm mechayeh. You you have a starting point. You know exactly where the sun is Bemahalcho Ha'emtzoi. We'll learn later how to translate it in Da'amiti.

But first you know in the Emtzoi itself, how many days, how many Mazalos did it move. Umekom Goivah Hashemesh Hayah Ba'ikar Zeh Beshesh V'esrim Mailos Vachamishim V'arba'im Chalakim Ushmoneh Shniyos Mimazal Te'omim. Simanam Chaf Vov Mach. Therefore, now it's simple.

Keshetirtzeh Leida Makom Hashemesh Bemahalcho Ha'emtzoi Bechol Zman Shetirzeh Tikach Minyan Hayamim. From the beginning date that he just gave. Shemischilas Oso Ha'ikar Ad Hayom Shetirzeh. V'sotzi Mahalcho Ha'emtzoi.

You always have to begin by learning where the sun is vis-a-vis the sun. Le'osam Hayamim Min Hasimanim Sheyadanu. V'sosef Hakol Al Ha'ikar Usikabetz Kol Minyan Minuy Vehayotzei Hu Makom Hashemesh Bemahalcha Ha'emtzoi Le'oso Hayom. Give the numbers.

Keitzad for example. Hareinu She'ratzinu Leida Makom Hashemesh Ha'emtzoi Bitchilas Leil Hashabbos Sheyomo Revi'i Asara Yom Lechodesh Tamuz Mishanah Zo Shehi Shnas Ha'ikar Matzanu Minyan Hayamim Min Yom Ha'ikar Ad Techilas Oso Hayom Zeh She'anu Rotzim Leida Makom Hashemesh Bo Me'ah Yom. I'm mechayeh. So now just apply the numbers from the starting point.

Lakachnu Emtza Mahalcho Leme'ah Yom Shehu Tzach Lag Nag. Vehosafnu Al Ikar Shehu Zag Lag. Veyatza Min Hacheshbon Me'ah Vechamesh Mailos Veshiv'im Veshisha Chalakim Vachamesh Esrei Shniyos. Simanam Kuf Hey Lazcha.

V'nimtza Mekomo Bemahalcho Ha'emtzoi Bitchilas Leil Zeh. Bitchilas Leil Zeh guys doesn't mean when it gets dark. Means 6 p.m. Doesn't mean when it gets dark because getting dark is connected to something altogether differently. And we all know that summer gets dark, if you're living in the northern part of the Kav Hamashveh, gets dark much later.

And winter it gets dark much earlier. Beginning of the night means six 6 p.m. Bemazal Sartan Bechamesh V'esrim Mailos Veshiv'im Veshisha Chalakim Bemailah Shesh Esrei. Now It's like, where is the track? Go ahead. Uh, the Goiva HaShemesh in in in plain words, are at the place where if the sun would have been there, it would have been the furthest away from the Earth.

But the the red the red circle, you see the red galgal, he goes around the whole time, and the sun is part of the red circle. So because the red circle circles, so the sun will sometimes be very far away from us. And sometimes the sun will come to the other side which is in our times in the south, which the sun will be close to us. So when the sun is further away, it'll go slower.

When it goes when it's when the sun is going when it in the south where it's closer to us, it will look to us that it's going much faster. Okay. And and the beauty of technology is is that Reb Ay Losh gave the words. It's good to hear it many times.

So pause the video and replay later and hear it and hear it and hear it and you'll chap it. Okay. Now. So again, just the words.

Maslul is a word that's used to know how far is the sun away from the Goiva HaShemesh. The Menaseh Hamaslul will therefore mean what difference is there vis-a-vis the mazalos, how where the sun is on the mazalos by the emtzo'i versus where will the sun be on the mazalos for the amiti. So we mentioned it can be two degrees apart, but that's the most off it can be. It's not always going to be two degrees apart.

Many times it's going to be much less than that apart. Much less than that apart. You understand? So you know the maslul. You then will have to make the Menaseh Hamaslul to know, you can't just say, well, if the center of the red is two degrees, just make the two degrees.

It won't be that way. The Menaseh Hamaslul is the portion that that with that we fix. The Menaseh Hamaslul has to be fixed. It is the portion The portion of the maslul that has to be fixed in order now to know where how to get to the Emtzo'i.

Amiti How to get to the Amiti. Thank you. So let's go. Perek Shloish Osor.

Halocha Alef. Im tirtzeh ledeiah mokom hashemesh hu amiti bechol yom shetirtzeh. First of all, like we learned in the previous chapter, toitzi schila mokom emtzoi l'yom shetirtzeh. You have to first know where it is in the Emtzo'i.

And then now v'toitzi mokom Goiva HaShemesh. You have to know where the Goiva HaShemesh is. And I know Yaker you asked the question, but the Goiva HaShemesh is not where the shemesh is. It's where is where the red circle is this time of the of the of bizman, vis-a-vis the Earth.

Is the Goiva HaShemesh all the way to the north? What's the farthest high point of the Goiva HaShemesh vis-a-vis the Earth has nothing to do with where the sun is. And now v'teida mokom Goiva HaShemesh u'mokom hashemesh emtzo'i. V'hanishar beineihem nikra maslul hashemesh. From where the sun is vis-a-vis the Goiva HaShemesh, that's called the Maslul HaShemesh.

Now Halocha Beis V'teida kama ma'alos hu maslul hashemesh. Im hoyoh hamaslul pochos mimeah ushmonim ma'alos. If it's less than 180 degrees, the sun is less than 180 degrees. If the sun is somewhere in between here and there, if it's in this 180 degrees.

And the the key again, there's two parts here. The iker will be the speed. That Im hoyoh hamaslul pochos mimeah ushmonim ma'alos tigra menaseh hamaslul mimokom hashemesh emtzo'i, then you'll have to deduct it. It's going to be deducted from.

V'im hoyoh hamaslul on the other side, more than 180 degrees until 360, toisif menaseh hamaslul al mokom hashemesh emtzo'i. What are you doing? Are you diminishing or are you adding? Are you going to be which direction are you moving in the mazalos because you are, well depends where the sun is. Depends where the sun is vis-a-vis where the Goiva HaShemesh is. Right, you mean relative speed? Isn't the speed the same? It says relative to the observer, right? So the speed is the same not only relative like this is important Yakevan.

The speed is always the same. The speed is always the same. The sun is moving by God exactly Speed is not The speed is not. The the ma'alos is the same.

Very good, very good. The distance is the same. The speed Explain when it goes down The speed Reb Ay Losh has a great example with the with with with the airplane. Let's hear it directly from the master.

When a when a plane goes uh the same it can go the same speed, but because high in the sky, it looks to to you like it's not even moving. But if that plane would have gone much lower, then it would if it goes even slower, it will speed by you in a second. Because The same thing with the sun. As relative to the observer.

Right. Not not not In other words And it means also in degrees. Because when I put this telephone right in front of my eyes, I'm blocking 180 degrees of my world. When I put it over here, it can block only 10 degrees.

It's getting clear. I gotta I must admit Boruch Hashem. The happiness. Are you telling me? I want to be his levana.

I'm doing my best. Meisar. So toisif menaseh hamaslul al mokom hashemesh emtzo'i. Umah sheyihiyeh achar shetigra o shetoisif alav v'tigra mimenu hu hamokom ha'amiti.

Now da. Da, that's it. v'zal vissin cherev. She'im yihiyeh hamaslul meah ushmonim beshaveh oy shloish meios veshishim beshaveh.

If like we pointed out before, if there's going to be two points in the circle where you won't have to make any cheshbon at all. Doesn't matter if you are in the emtzo'i or you are in the amiti, the appearance of where is the sun on the mazalos will be exactly the same. You won't have to make a menas, a portion to calculate. However, ella yihiyeh hamokom emtzo'i hu hamokom ha'amiti.

Uchan menaseh hamaslul al derech zu. Im yihiyeh hamaslul eser ma'alos yihiyeh menaso esrim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh esrim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso arboim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shloshim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso shmonim vachamishim chalakim.

Ah, not 20, 20, 20, 20, 20. In other words, that's what we were pointing out over here, that since you are covering a different amount of degrees every day, so you can't make such a simple cheshbon because the proportion of the change will be affected by the Goiva HaShemesh. Farther away, closer will be a different degree. V'im yihiyeh arboim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas vachamishim v'esrim chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh chamishim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'tisha esrei chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shishim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'echad v'arboim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shiv'im ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'echad vachamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh shmonim ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas ushnayim vachamishim chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh tish'im ma'alos yihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'shiv'im vachamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah tihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'shiv'im v'shiv'im chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'eser tihiyeh menaso mailah achas ushmonim vachamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'esrim tihiyeh menaso mailah achas ushmonim ushmonim chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh meah ushloshim tihiyeh menaso mailah achas ushloshim vachamishim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'arboim tihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'chamesh v'arboim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah vachamishim tihiyeh menaso mailah achas ushloshim ushloshim chalakim. V'im yihiyeh meah v'shishim tihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'tisha esrei chalakim.

V'im yihiyeh meah v'shiv'im tihiyeh menaso mailah achas v'chelek echad. V'im hoyoh meah ushmonim beshaveh ein goirin umoisifin klum kmo shebeyarnu ella mokom hashemesh emtzoi hu mokom amiti. Many people daven this way. Now you get it where it comes from.

But if you understand it, efes it has value. Aval az medaven umeivin shum milah. Oh. Halocha Hey.

Hoyoh hamaslul yeiser al meah ushmonim ma'alos. Let me go back to a picture over here. Let me show you visually what the Rambam is trying to say and then we'll read it inside. The Rambam wants to point out that since the amount of degrees between here and here is one, between here and here is another, between here and here is another.

Don't say that the the number between here and here, right? If you're going from here to here, go back and use this number. No, this will not correlate to that. This has to correlate to this. That's the best I can do with the picture and let's go read it inside.

Loy yodu mah soidra. Very good. Halocha hey. Guys, it's good.

The camera's good because I needed like say I needed 50 times, but Reb Ay Losh had to repeat it 50 times. So he has patience. My my it's being filmed. Just replay it.

If I made a mistake as Ach V'achi, I really apologize. But if I said it correct, then it's good. We have to we have to know it as a formula. We don't have to understand the why behind it.

No, no, no. It's good to understand why behind it. But correct. Okay, very good.

Halocha Hey. Hoyoh hamaslul yeiser al meah ushmonim ma'alos. Tigra oisoi. How many ma'alos deduct it from the 360 and then you'll know the Menaseh Hamaslul, then you'll know the Menaseh.

Keitzad harei shehoyo hamaslul masayim ma'alos. Now, you could say 200 ma'alos simple 180 20, say 20. Not 20. The the degrees that was covered in the first 20 is not going to be the same number of the degrees over here.

So what you do is you deduct the 200 from the 360. So now you have how much? Now you have 160. Uchvar yedanu shemenas meah veshishim ma'alos hu shnayim v'arboim chalakim. So now you'll know, nimtza menas masayim hu shnayim v'arboim chalakim.

Halocha Vov. V'chein im hoyoh hamaslul shloish meois ma'alos. Tigra oisoi mishloish meois veshishim. Yishar lonu shishim.

Now, you know from the other side, umenas shishim ma'alos hu mailah achas v'echad v'arboim chalakim. V'chein im nasa shloish meois ma'alos. V'al derech zu tichpol l'chol minyan hama'alos. Halocha Zayin.

Harei shehoyo hamaslul chamesh veshishim ma'alos. And uchvar yedanu shemenas shishim hu mailah achas v'echad v'arboim chelek. And umenas shiv'im hi mailah achas v'echad vachamishim chelek. So nimtza bein shnei haminyanos asarah chalakim.

And that's good enough even though it's not accurate for our goal of knowing the molad were accurate. Ulfi cheshbon hama'alos yihiyeh l'chol mailah chelek echad. Viyihiyeh menas hamaslul shehu chamesh veshishim mailah achas veshishim v'arboim chalakim. Halocha Ches.

V'chein ilu hoyoh hamaslul sheva veshiv'im choshesh menaseh mailah achas ushmonim v'arboim chelek. V'al derech zu ta'aseh bechol maslul sheyihiyeh beminyano beinoniyim hameyuchadim ha'asiriyos. Bein becheshbon hashemesh. Bein beshaar cheshbonos hayediah.

For example, Halocha Tes. Harei sherotzinu lodaas mokom hashemesh hu amiti bitchilas leil Shabbos. Now we're going to the amiti. When Arba'ah asar yom l'chodesh Tamuz mishanah zu.

By the way, that shanah zu was Dalet Tof Tof Kuf Lamed Ches. Toitzi emtza hashemesh tchilah. First emtza hashemesh. And we already told us in the last chapter how you will find out that it's going to be Kuf Peh Aleph Lamed Ches Peh Aleph Kuf Hei kmo shebeyarnu.

Now, now the next thing is where is the Goiva HaShemesh? Not where the sun is in the goiva. Where is the Goiva HaShemesh? And you're going to find out that it's Peh Vov Mem Hei Kuf Gimmel. Vis-a-vis the mazalos. And now v'tigreihu min hagoiva min ha'emtza.

Where is the sun itself? That's the maslul. And that's Yud Ches Mem Beis Nun Vov. Now the Rambam says it comes to a certain sub-sub-sub fraction that you don't have to make a cheshbon in. V'al takpid bechol maslul al hachalakim.

Ella im yihiyu hachalakim krovim l'shloshim, make them into one mailah. V'hoisef al minyan hama'alos hamaslul. And it's going to work and it's going to work. Mamish when you're standing on the earth, it will give you the mokom hashemesh hu amiti.

Ulfichach yihiyeh hamaslul zeh tesha esrei ma'alos. V'tihiyeh menaseh al derech shebeyarnu shmoneh ushloshim chalakim. Halocha Yud. Ulfi shehamaslul hazeh hoyoh pochos mimeah ushmonim, the number the example of Halocha Tes, therefore tigra hamanah shehi shmoneh ushloshim chalakim mei'emtza hashemesh.

And you're going to v'yishaer Kuf Dalet Dalet Yud Tes Lamed Beis. Nimtza mokom hashemesh amiti bitchilas laylah zeh bemazal Sartan. The Rambam the bottom line is will be bechamesh esrei ma'alos bo pochos shnayim. I, what are the shniyos? Doesn't matter.

V'al tifneh l'shniyos klal. And then, God willing, in the next chapters, which will be Mamish l'Yehudah Maisa Aidah Rabbenu Kmir Yareach. V'lo yisha'er cheshbonos shniyos, ella hachalakim levad. V'im yihiyu hashniyos krovos l'shloshim, make them into a chelek v'hoisif al hachalakim.

And the final halocha of this chapter. Ume'achar sheteida mahalach emtza hayareiach, Now you will also know teida yom hatekufah amiti. Kod tekufah shetirzeh. Bein tekufos habayis achar ikar zeh shebo hischalnu.

Bein tekufos sheyaradnu mishanim mukdamin. The word tekufah means the beginning of the season of spring. And everyone says, yeah, the tekufah is when the sun is in the beginning of Mazal Taleh. But based on the previous two chapters, it should be come clear that such a statement is very good if you want to be vague, but it's not good enough because when you say the sun is in the beginning of Mazal Taleh, upa, is it in the beginning of the Mazal Taleh from the emtzo'i or is it from the beginning of the amiti? And and and and it's amazing.

You know, sometimes the the the tekufah will begin not not when you think it begins. Not where you think it should have begun because of the rules that we learned above. Kevin, we are moving on to today's third chapter. Today's third chapter is Perek Yud Daled.

And as far as the sun is concerned, the moon is a lot more freilach. Beginning with, beginning with that the sun we said only has two galgalim. Reb Ay Losh gave it the blue and the red. Chidush.

It's not blue, it's not red, but we're just as a point of reference. Now, the moon has four galgalim. But it's very different than the two galgalim of the sun. You see when we spoke about the two galgalim of the sun it was very simple.

Very simple meaning that we put the red inside the blue. That means the movement of the blue affects the red. When it comes to the moon, here we have the picture the final time I'm going to have to be matriach Reb Ay Losh to pick up the camera for Chabad.org. Here we go.

The moon is in the first galgal over the earth. Here you see this path in this path, this beautiful path that they draw. This is really three galgalim. Three galgalim.

Now we're not going to go into how quick does each galgal move, but what we will do now is explain how there is a sum total of the three galgalim. There is a sum total of these three galgalim. All of them this galgal Of what? What do you mean? They're moving, they're moving, they're moving means like this Yaker. The moon is in the galgal.

The moon is fixed in the galgal. I want to know where the moon is vis-a-vis the mazalos. Whenever the moon vis-a-vis the mazalos and the sun vis-a-vis the mazalos will be exactly in the same place, the moon will not be visible. And shortly thereafter, whether it is six hours v'chulei, it's shayach to see the moon again, which is the goal.

Want to see the molad. We said when we gave the intro that the galgal of the moon is moving around 13 degrees a day. It's not wrong to make that general statement. But really you have to now go into a detail at least beginning with this chapter.

Number one, there are three galgalim that have the moon in it. But now look at the moon itself. You see this over here? There is a little mini galgal. And the mini galgal is moving.

See how it's almost impossible to give the right answer. Because if you're going to say it's moving from east to west, then when you go into the other part of it, it's going from west to east. So klal whenever relative to relative to who? So like this. Until until now, until now Keivan, it it was relative to us is always one movement, either either east west or west east.

That's because we are in the center of everything. So the galgal hayomi is moving um east west. The galgal of the sun is moving west east. Here, since we're not in the center of it, we're not in the center of it.

So when we're standing on the earth and we're looking up at it, if the moon is here, well, it's moving this way when it's on the top 180, and it's moving in the opposite direction when you're in the bottom of it. So remember that. You have the movement of the three. The little one is being carried along in the three.

And in this chapter, we're not going to focus on the movement of the little one. We're going to put the dot in the middle of the middle one. The moon is not the dot. And we want to know how quick is the little one moving.

Is the little dot moving? The little dot is the sum total of the three. That is what we will have in this chapter. So understand what we have to do. We have to speak about the first three, placing the moon theoretically in the center of it.

Then we're going to move on in the next chapters that the moon is not in the center of it. The moon is on the edge of the little galgal. So if you want to know where the moon is in the galgal halevana Yaker, you have to separate the three from the one. You have to separate.

Rabbi Losh is shepping nachas ruach or he's saying oy gevald. One of the two. I hope he's shepping nachas. Okay, let's go.

So this chapter has six halachos. And the Rambam begins. Halocha Alef. Hayareiach.

How many names does the moon have in the Torah? Who knows, who remembers? Four. Now you know why. Uh? Hayareiach shnei mahalchim emtzoyim yesh lo. Hayareiach atzmoi.

You know what I mean? Yareiach levana. Sihara. See? See? And if I would remember the fourth, I would have said it. I jumped ahead because I forgot.

So now I forgot. So let's go one second. It's it's it's levana. Yareiach.

Sihara. There's another. And then we learned this in Chasidus. And L'chatchilah it's connected to this.

And if not, I stand corrected. Okay. Hayareiach shnei mahalchim emtzoyim yesh lo. Really there's two mahalchim are not two, there're four.

But the three make a sum total. Chaps like we learned by the sun. The moon the red and the blue are moving in the same direction. Either blue is moving so so slow, say that when we gave the 13 be'erech it's a sum total.

It's a sum total by the sun. The nun tes ches. Here, the sum total will only be about the three. One mahalach.

Hayareiach atzmo, but the moon itself misovev b'galgal kotton she'eino makif es ha'oilom, she'eino makif es ha'oilom. The little one. That's why Keivan right when we were trying to say in what degree is it going? And we say yeah it's going from mizrach l'maariv. Well it's going from mizrach l'maariv only on the top only on the top.

It's going in the bottom it's going like the like the like everything else, not the galgal hayomi, like the other galgal hashemesh and the galgal of the of the levana that we're going to be speaking about is ironically going from maariv l'mizrach. Things are going in the opposite way than it looks. Everything is the opposite of what it looks. That's the world.

U'mahalcho ha'emtzoi b'oiso hagalgal hakoton is called Emtza Hamaslul. Now guys, see that's the beauty. The Rambam used the word maslul in the previous chapter. Remember the maslul and the Menaseh Maslul? The Rambam chose these words and he's taking the same word and it means something else by the moon.

The Rambam doesn't want us to fall asleep. The Rambam is a master teacher. He wants us to keep us on our toes. So whenever you hear the word Emtza Sahar is the last name for moon, for the moon.

Well, that's that's um Keivan that has some uh Persian backgrounds, that has some Arabic backgrounds that they copycat, they steal everything from us. Sihara is Aramaic, it's our our language. Very good. Aramaic.

Okay. The king is just three letters, just three. Sahar Yareiach Levana. So I stand corrected.

So now we said it's three and one. Forget about the the three, that's why there's three names to the moon. Okay, Zol Zein Azoy. Gezunteit.

And if I'm wrong, Yechid Gezunteit. The main thing is to learn with simcha over here. Now. So again, guys, the Emtza Hamaslul.

I'm going to point out the picture. This point is the Emtza Hamaslul. It's very important. This point means the moon is really not here.

The moon is somewhere on the edge of this little guy. But the Rambam is not going to speak in this chapter about the little one. The Rambam wants to know what is the sum total amount of distance of degrees, of degrees that the Galgal Hayareiach is moving, which is the sum total of the three which is schlepping within it the center of the little one. But don't forget that after you know where the center is, that's not where the moon is because the moon is not in the center.

The moon is on the edge of it. But that will leave for later, one step at a time. V'hagalgal hakoton atzmo misovev b'galgal godol hamakif es ha'oilom. U'mahalcho ha'emtzoi shel zeh hagalgal hakoton shehu misovev b'galgal godol hamakif es ha'oilom, that's called the Emtza Hayareiach.

Emtza Hayareiach. Mahalach emtza hayareiach b'yom echad. How much does the Emtza Hayareiach go every day? That little dot that they pointed out to? Shalosh esrei ma'alos 13 That's a general number. Now we're going to get into an accurate number.

V'asarah chalakim v'chamesh shloshim shniyos. Simanam Yud Gimmel Lamed Alef. Halocha Beis. Nimtza mahalcho b'asarah yomim.

Meah v'achas ushloshim ma'alos v'chamishim v'chamishim chalakim v'arboim v'chamishim shniyos. Simanam Kuf Lamed Hey Mem Hei Nun. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'meah yom, Elef shlosh meios v'chamishim v'sheva ma'alos v'esrim ushlosh chalakim v'chamisha asar shniyos. Simanam Reish Lamed Beis Ches Gimmel.

V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'elef yom, Elef v'shesh meios v'esrim v'sheva ma'alos, ushloshim ushmoneh chalakim v'chamishim v'chamishim v'shesh shniyos. Simanam Reish Lamed Zayin Lamed Ches Ches Kuf. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'aseres alofim yom, Elef shesh meios esrim v'shesh ma'alos, v'shesh esrei ma'alos ushloshim ushmoneh v'chamishim v'chamishim shniyos. Simanam Reish Yud Vov Ches Gimmel Nun.

V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'meah elef yom, Shalosh meios arba'im v'sheva ma'alos ushmoneh v'chamishim chalakim v'esrim shniyos. Simanam Gimmel Alef Nun Kuf Ches. The Rambam wants to get us familiarized in taking a number and just getting used to what a 10 and a 50 and 100 and a 1000, we should go backwards and forwards get used to that. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'tisha v'esrim yom.

Oh. Shtayim v'esrim ma'alos v'tisha chalakim v'shesh v'chamishim shniyos. Simanam Ches Gimmel Vov Nun Vov. In other words, V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'shanah peshutah Shalosh meios arba'im v'shmoneh ma'alos v'chamishim ushlosh chalakim v'arboim shniyos.

Siman lohem Shin Mem Dalet Ches Beis Mem Gimmel. V'al derech zu tichpol l'chol minyan hayomim shetirtzeh. Halocha Gimmel. Mahalach emtza hamaslul b'yom echad.

How much does it go every day? Like we said Shalosh esrei ma'alos. Ah. The Rambam is writing two different speeds. First is the I'm sorry.

How much is the speed of the three? The speed of the three is 13 right? 13 and be'erech 10 plus. How much is the speed of the little one? That's the halocha number three. How quick is the little one turning? Again, from which direction? It depends. Is it on the top or is it on the bottom? But before in the top and the bottom, that means how much is it going further or closer? Top or bottom mizrach maariv is mamish opposite directions.

Amazing. How quick is it going? Also 13, but here it's 13 3 plus. 13 Shalosh esrei ma'alos shlosha chalakim ushmoneh v'arboim v'chamishim shniyos. Simanam Yud Gimmel Gimmel Nun Ches.

V'nimtza mahalcho of the little guy. B'asarah yomim meah ushloshim ma'alos ushloshim v'shesh chalakim v'esrim shniyos. Simanam Kuf Lamed Lamed Gimmel Kuf which is unusual that we have a precise number. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'meah yom elef shalosh meios v'shesh ma'alos v'esrim chalakim v'esrim v'shiv'im shniyos.

Simanam Reish Ches Beis Ches Tes Nun Gimmel. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'elef yom elef arba'im v'shmoneh ma'alos ushmoneh v'chamishim chalakim v'chamishim shniyos. Simanam Kuf Dalet Nun Nun Ches. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'aseres alofim yom Shalosh meios shmonim v'tesha ma'alos ushmoneh v'arboim chalakim v'esrim shniyos.

Simanam Shin Ches Tes Mem Kuf Ches. V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'tisha v'esrim yom Shmoneh esrei ma'alos ushloshim v'chamishim chalakim v'arboim shniyos. Simanam Yud Ches Mem Gimmel. Halocha Daled.

V'nimtza she'eres mahalcho b'shanah peshutah Shalosh meios chamishim v'shmoneh ma'alos ushmoneh ushloshim chalakim v'esrim shniyos. Simanam Shin Nun Ches Lamed Ches Kuf. Mokom emtza hayareiach. Like we had it beginning Thursday.

Shehu ikar l'cheshbonos eilu bemazal shor is mailah achas is giving the beginning point. v'arba'ah asar chalakim ushloshim v'arboim shniyos. Simanam Lamed Alef Yud Dalet Mem Gimmel. V'emtza hamaslul hoyo b'ikar zeh Peh Dalet Ches Kuf Gimmel.

Hoyo b'ikar zeh arba'ah ushmonim ma'alos ushmoneh v'esrim chalakim ushtayim v'arboim shniyos. Simanam Peh Dalet Kuf Ches Mem Beis. Ma'achar sheteida mahalach emtza hayareiach, which is the total of the three, V'emtza hamaslul shehu ikar she'al toisef uvain tigra mimenu batchilah. So now you'll know teida mokom emtza hayareiach bechol yom shetirzeh.

Al derech she'asisa be'emtza hashemesh like we had in the previous chapter. V'achar shetoitzi emtza hayareiach l'tchilas halailah shetirzeh. Now tistakel bashemesh v'teida be'eizeh mazal hi. Halocha Hei.

Im hoisoh hashemesh mechatzi mazal dli ad chatzi mazal taleh tanich emtza hayareiach kmo shehi. V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mechatzi taleh ad tchilas mazal te'omim Toisef al emtza hayareiach chamisha asar chalakim. The Rambam is trying to point out that for you to see the new moon as we spoke about in the introduction, you see it in the beginning of the month, the moon is going to be towards the east of the sun. So first sunset.

First sunset. Now how much time after sunset, that's what we're talking about over here, can you see the moon? No. We made a cheshbon until 6:00 PM. The problem is is that summer and winter, summer and winter, sunset is going to be a lot later.

Now, chap something. You can only see the new moon after sunset. After the sun sets, if it takes another two hours for the sun to set, the more it takes time for the sun to set, the bigger the moon is growing. The bigger the moon is growing and that's what the Rambam is talking about.

V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mitchilas mazal te'omim ad chatzi mazal sartan toisif al emtza hayareiach shloshim chalakim. 15, 30, 15, 30. V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mechatzi sartan ad tchilas mazal aryeh toisif al emtza hayareiach chamisha asar chalakim. V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mitchilas aryeh ad chatzi mazal besulah Tigra mei'emtza hayareiach chamisha asar chalakim.

V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mechatzi besulah ad chatzi mazal moznayim tanach be'emtza hayareiach kmo shehi. All of this is based on the cheshbon that every hour every hour the moon is traveling a half a degree. A half a degree is 30 chalakim. V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mechatzi moznayim ad tchilas mazal keshes Tigra mei'emtza hayareiach chamisha asar chalakim.

V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mitchilas keshes ad tchilas mazal gdi Tigra mei'emtza hayareiach shloshim chalakim. V'im tihiyeh hashemesh mitchilas gdi ad chatzi mazal dagim Tigra mei'emtza hayareiach chamisha asar chalakim. Molad. What is the optimum time to see the molad? I'm not trying to look I can see the new moon the whole month.

But when we're speaking about the new moon, the new moon is that it's barely moving away from the sun. What's the optimum time? So like this. When the sun